1
 He lay flat on the brown, pine-needled floor of the forest, his chin on his folded arms,
and high overhead the wind blew in the tops of the pine trees. The mountainside sloped
gently where he lay; but below it was steep and he could see the dark of the oiled road
winding through the pass. There was a stream alongside the road and far down the
pass he saw a mill beside the stream and the falling water of the dam, white in the
summer sunlight.
 “Is that the mill?” he asked.
 “Yes.”
 “I do not remember it.”
 “It was built since you were here. The old mill is farther down; much below the pass.”
 He spread the photostated military map out on the forest floor and looked at it
carefully. The old man looked over his shoulder. He was a short and solid old man in a
black peasant’s smock and gray iron-stiff trousers and he wore rope-soled shoes. He
was breathing heavily from the climb and his hand rested on one of the two heavy packs
they had been carrying.
 “Then you cannot see the bridge from here.”
 “No,” the old man said. “This is the easy country of the pass where the stream flows
gently. Below, where the road turns out of sight in the trees, it drops suddenly and there
is a steep gorge—”
 “I remember.”
 “Across this gorge is the bridge.”
 “And where are their posts?”
 “There is a post at the mill that you see there.”
 The young man, who was studying the country, took his glasses from the pocket of his
faded, khaki flannel shirt, wiped the lenses with a handkerchief, screwed the eyepieces
around until the boards of the mill showed suddenly clearly and he saw the wooden
bench beside the door; the huge pile of sawdust that rose behind the open shed where
the circular saw was, and a stretch of the flume that brought the logs down from the
mountainside on the other bank of the stream. The stream showed clear and smoothlooking in the glasses and, below the curl of the falling water, the spray from the dam
was blowing in the wind.
 “There is no sentry.”
 “There is smoke coming from the millhouse,” the old man said. “There are also clothes
hanging on a line.”
 “I see them but I do not see any sentry.”
 “Perhaps he is in the shade,” the old man explained. “It is hot there now. He would be
in the shadow at the end we do not see.”
 “Probably. Where is the next post?”
 “Below the bridge. It is at the roadmender’s hut at kilometer five from the top of the
pass.”
 “How many men are here?” He pointed at the mill.
 “Perhaps four and a corporal.”
 “And below?”
 “More. I will find out.”
 “And at the bridge?”
“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway 3
 “Always two. One at each end.”
 “We will need a certain number of men,” he said. “How many men can you get?”
 “I can bring as many men as you wish,” the old man said. “There are many men now
here in the hills.”
 “How many?”
 “There are more than a hundred. But they are in small bands. How many men will you
need?”
 “I will let you know when we have studied the bridge.”
 “Do you wish to study it now?”
 “No. Now I wish to go to where we will hide this explosive until it is time. I would like to
have it hidden in utmost security at a distance no greater than half an hour from the
bridge, if that is possible.”
 “That is simple,” the old man said. “From where we are going, it will all be downhill to
the bridge. But now we must climb a little in seriousness to get there. Are you hungry?”
 “Yes,” the young man said. “But we will eat later. How are you called? I have
forgotten.” It was a bad sign to him that he had forgotten.
 “Anselmo,” the old man said. “I am called Anselmo and I come from Barco de Avila.
Let me help you with that pack.”
 The young man, who was tall and thin, with sun-streaked fair hair, and a wind- and
sun-burned face, who wore the sun-faded flannel shirt, a pair of peasant’s trousers and
rope-soled shoes, leaned over, put his arm through one of the leather pack straps and
swung the heavy pack up onto his shoulders. He worked his arm through the other strap
and settled the weight of the pack against his back. His shirt was still wet from where the
pack had rested.
 “I have it up now,” he said. “How do we go?”
 “We climb,” Anselmo said.
 Bending under the weight of the packs, sweating, they climbed steadily in the pine
forest that covered the mountainside. There was no trail that the young man could see,
but they were working up and around the face of the mountain and now they crossed a
small stream and the old man went steadily on ahead up the edge of the rocky stream
bed. The climbing now was steeper and more difficult, until finally the stream seemed to
drop down over the edge of a smooth granite ledge that rose above them and the old
man waited at the foot of the ledge for the young man to come up to him.
 “How are you making it?”
 “All right,” the young man said. He was sweating heavily and his thigh muscles were
twitchy from the steepness of the climb.
 “Wait here now for me. I go ahead to warn them. You do not want to be shot at
carrying that stuff.”
 “Not even in a joke,” the young man said. “Is it far?”
 “It is very close. How do they call thee?”
 “Roberto,” the young man answered. He had slipped the pack off and lowered it gently
down between two boulders by the stream bed.
 “Wait here, then, Roberto, and I will return for you.”
 “Good,” the young man said. “But do you plan to go down this way to the bridge?”
 “No. When we go to the bridge it will be by another way. Shorter and easier.”
 “I do not want this material to be stored too far from the bridge.”
 “You will see. If you are not satisfied, we will take another place.”
 “We will see,” the young man said.
 He sat by the packs and watched the old man climb the ledge. It was not hard to climb
and from the way he found hand-holds without searching for them the young man could
see that he had climbed it many times before. Yet whoever was above had been very
careful not to leave any trail.
 The young man, whose name was Robert Jordan, was extremely hungry and he was
worried. He was often hungry but he was not usually worried because he did not give
any importance to what happened to himself and he knew from experience how simple it
“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway 4
was to move behind the enemy lines in all this country. It was as simple to move behind
them as it was to cross through them, if you had a good guide. It was only giving
importance to what happened to you if you were caught that made it difficult; that and
deciding whom to trust. You had to trust the people you worked with completely or not at
all, and you had to make decisions about the trusting. He was not worried about any of
that. But there were other things.
 This Anselmo had been a good guide and he could travel wonderfully in the
mountains. Robert Jordan could walk well enough himself and he knew from following
him since before daylight that the old man could walk him to death. Robert Jordan
trusted the man, Anselmo, so far, in everything except judgment. He had not yet had an
opportunity to test his judgment, and, anyway, the judgment was his own responsibility.
No, he did not worry about Anselmo and the problem of the bridge was no more difficult
than many other problems. He knew how to blow any sort of bridge that you could name
and he had blown them of all sizes and constructions. There was enough explosive and
all equipment in the two packs to blow this bridge properly even if it were twice as big as
Anselmo reported it, as he remembered it when he had walked over it on his way to La
Granja on a walking trip in 1933, and as Golz had read him the description of it night
before last in that upstairs room in the house outside of the Escorial.
 “To blow the bridge is nothing,” Golz had said, the lamplight on his scarred, shaved
head, pointing with a pencil on the big map. “You understand?”
 “Yes, I understand.”
 “Absolutely nothing. Merely to blow the bridge is a failure.”
 “Yes, Comrade General.”
 “To blow the bridge at a stated hour based on the time set for the attack is how it
should be done. You see that naturally. That is your right and how it should be done.”
 Golz looked at the pencil, then tapped his teeth with it.
 Robert Jordan had said nothing.
 “You understand that is your right and how it should be done,” Golz went on, looking
at him and nodding his head. He tapped on the map now with the pencil. “That is how I
should do it. That is what we cannot have.”
 “Why, Comrade General?”
 “Why?” Golz said, angrily. “How many attacks have you seen and you ask me why?
What is to guarantee that my orders are not changed? What is to guarantee that the
attack is not annulled? What is to guarantee that the attack is not postponed? What is to
guarantee that it starts within six hours of when it should start? Has any attack ever
been as it should?”
 “It will start on time if it is your attack,” Robert Jordan said.
 “They are never my attacks,” Golz said. “I make them. But they are not mine. The
artillery is not mine. I must put in for it. I have never been given what I ask for even
when they have it to give. That is the least of it. There are other things. You know how
those people are. It is not necessary to go into all of it. Always there is something.
Always some one will interfere. So now be sure you understand.”
 “So when is the bridge to be blown?” Robert Jordan had asked.
 “After the attack starts. As soon as the attack has started and not before. So that no
reinforcements will come up over that road.” He pointed with his pencil. “I must know
that nothing will come up over that road.”
 “And when is the attack?”
 “I will tell you. But you are to use the date and hour only as an indication of a
probability. You must be ready for that time. You will blow the bridge after the attack has
started. You see?” he indicated with the pencil. “That is the only road on which they can
bring up reinforcements. That is the only road on which they can get up tanks, or
artillery, or even move a truck toward the pass which I attack. I must know that bridge is
gone. Not before, so it can be repaired if the attack is postponed. No. It must go when
the attack starts and I must know it is gone. There are only two sentries. The man who
will go with you has just come from there. He is a very reliable man, they say. You will
“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway 5
see. He has people in the mountains. Get as many men as you need. Use as few as
possible, but use enough. I do not have to tell you these things.”
 “And how do I determine that the attack has started?”
 “It is to be made with a full division. There will be an aerial bombardment as
preparation. You are not deaf, are you?”
 “Then I may take it that when the planes unload, the attack has started?”
 “You could not always take it like that,” Golz said and shook his head. “But in this
case, you may. It is my attack.”
 “I understand it,” Robert Jordan had said. “I do not say I like it very much.”
 “Neither do I like it very much. If you do not want to undertake it, say so now. If you
think you cannot do it, say so now.”
 “I will do it,” Robert Jordan had said. “I will do it all right.”
 “That is all I have to know,” Golz said. “That nothing comes up over that bridge. That is
absolute.”
 “I understand.”
 “I do not like to ask people to do such things and in such a way,” Golz went on. “I
could not order you to do it. I understand what you may be forced to do through my
putting such conditions. I explain very carefully so that you understand and that you
understand all of the possible difficulties and the importance.”
 “And how will you advance on La Granja if that bridge is blown?”
 “We go forward prepared to repair it after we have stormed the pass. It is a very
complicated and beautiful operation. As complicated and as beautiful as always. The
plan has been manufactured in Madrid. It is another of Vicente Rojo, the unsuccessful
professor’s, masterpieces. I make the attack and I make it, as always, not in sufficient
force. It is a very possible operation, in spite of that. I am much happier about it than
usual. It can be successful with that bridge eliminated. We can take Segovia. Look, I
show you how it goes. You see? It is not the top of the pass where we attack. We hold
that. It is much beyond. Look— Here— Like this—”
 “I would rather not know,” Robert Jordan said.
 “Good,” said Golz. “It is less of baggage to carry with you on the other side, yes?”
 “I would always rather not know. Then, no matter what can happen, it was not me that
talked.”
 “It is better not to know,” Golz stroked his forehead with the pencil. “Many times I wish
I did not know myself. But you do know the one thing you must know about the bridge?”
 “Yes. I know that.”
 “I believe you do,” Golz said. “I will not make you any little speech. Let us now have a
drink. So much talking makes me very thirsty, Comrade Hordan. You have a funny
name in Spanish, Comrade Hordown.”
 “How do you say Golz in Spanish, Comrade General?”
 “Hotze,” said Golz grinning, making the sound deep in his throat as though hawking
with a bad cold. “Hotze,” he croaked. “Comrade Heneral Khotze. If I had known how
they pronounced Golz in Spanish I would pick me out a better name before I come to
war here. When I think I come to command a division and I can pick out any name I
want and I pick out Hotze. Heneral Hotze. Now it is too late to change. How do you like
partizan work?” It was the Russian term for guerilla work behind the lines.
 “Very much,” Robert Jordan said. He grinned. “It is very healthy in the open air.”
 “I like it very much when I was your age, too,” Golz said. “They tell me you blow
bridges very well. Very scientific. It is only hearsay. I have never seen you do anything
myself. Maybe nothing ever happens really. You really blow them?” he was teasing now.
“Drink this,” he handed the glass of Spanish brandy to Robert Jordan. “You really blow
them?”
 “Sometimes.”
 “You better not have any sometimes on this bridge. No, let us not talk any more about
this bridge. You understand enough now about that bridge. We are very serious so we
can make very strong jokes. Look, do you have many girls on the other side of the
“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway 6
lines?”
 “No, there is no time for girls.”
 “I do not agree. The more irregular the service, the more irregular the life. You have
very irregular service. Also you need a haircut.”
 “I have my hair cut as it needs it,” Robert Jordan said. He would be damned if he
would have his head shaved like Golz. “I have enough to think about without girls,” he
said sullenly.
 “What sort of uniform am I supposed to wear?” Robert Jordan asked.
 “None,” Golz said. “Your haircut is all right. I tease you. You are very different from
me,” Golz had said and filled up the glasses again.
 “You never think about only girls. I never think at all. Why should I? I am Général
Sovietique. I never think. Do not try to trap me into thinking.”
 Some one on his staff, sitting on a chair working over a map on a drawing board,
growled at him in the language Robert Jordan did not understand.
 “Shut up,” Golz had said, in English. “I joke if I want. I am so serious is why I can joke.
Now drink this and then go. You understand, huh?”
 “Yes,” Robert Jordan had said. “I understand.”
 They had shaken hands and he had saluted and gone out to the staff car where the
old man was waiting asleep and in that car they had ridden over the road past
Guadarrama, the old man still asleep, and up the Navacerrada road to the Alpine Club
hut where he, Robert Jordan, slept for three hours before they started.
 That was the last he had seen of Golz with his strange white face that never tanned,
his hawk eyes, the big nose and thin lips and the shaven head crossed with wrinkles
and with scars. Tomorrow night they would be outside the Escorial in the dark along the
road; the long lines of trucks loading the infantry in the darkness; the men, heavy
loaded, climbing up into the trucks; the machine-gun sections lifting their guns into the
trucks; the tanks being run up on the skids onto the long-bodied tank trucks; pulling the
Division out to move them in the night for the attack on the pass. He would not think
about that. That was not his business. That was Golz’s business. He had only one thing
to do and that was what he should think about and he must think it out clearly and take
everything as it came along, and not worry. To worry was as bad as to be afraid. It
simply made things more difficult.
 He sat now by the stream watching the clear water flowing between the rocks and,
across the stream, he noticed there was a thick bed of watercress. He crossed the
stream, picked a double handful, washed the muddy roots clean in the current and then
sat down again beside his pack and ate the clean, cool green leaves and the crisp,
peppery-tasting stalks. He knelt by the stream and, pushing his automatic pistol around
on his belt to the small of his back so that it would not be wet, he lowered himself with a
hand on each of two boulders and drank from the stream. The water was achingly cold.
 Pushing himself up on his hands he turned his head and saw the old man coming
down the ledge. With him was another man, also in a black peasant’s smock and the
dark gray trousers that were almost a uniform in that province, wearing rope-soled
shoes and with a carbine slung over his back. This man was bareheaded. The two of
them came scrambling down the rock like goats.
 They came up to him and Robert Jordan got to his feet.
 “Salud, Camarada,” he said to the man with the carbine and smiled.
 “Salud,” the other said, grudgingly. Robert Jordan looked at the man’s heavy, beardstubbled face. It was almost round and his head was round and set close on his
shoulders. His eyes were small and set too wide apart and his ears were small and set
close to his head. He was a heavy man about five feet ten inches tall and his hands and
feet were large. His nose had been broken and his mouth was cut at one corner and the
line of the scar across the upper lip and lower jaw showed through the growth of beard
over his face.
 The old man nodded his head at this man and smiled.
 “He is the boss here,” he grinned, then flexed his arms as though to make the muscles
“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway 7
stand out and looked at the man with the carbine in a half-mocking admiration. “A very
strong man.”
 “I can see it,” Robert Jordan said and smiled again. He did not like the look of this man
and inside himself he was not smiling at all.
 “What have you to justify your identity?” asked the man with the carbine.
 Robert Jordan unpinned a safety pin that ran through his pocket flap and took a folded
paper out of the left breast pocket of his flannel shirt and handed it to the man, who
opened it, looked at it doubtfully and turned it in his hands.
 So he cannot read, Robert Jordan noted.
 “Look at the seal,” he said.
 The old man pointed to the seal and the man with the carbine studied it, turning it in
his fingers.
 “What seal is that?”
 “Have you never seen it?”
 “No.”
 “There are two,” said Robert Jordan. “One is S. I. M., the service of the military
intelligence. The other is the General Staff.”
 “Yes, I have seen that seal before. But here no one commands but me,” the other said
sullenly. “What have you in the packs?”
 “Dynamite,” the old man said proudly. “Last night we crossed the lines in the dark and
all day we have carried this dynamite over the mountain.”
 “I can use dynamite,” said the man with the carbine. He handed back the paper to
Robert Jordan and looked him over. “Yes. I have use for dynamite. How much have you
brought me?”
 “I have brought you no dynamite,” Robert Jordan said to him evenly. “The dynamite is
for another purpose. What is your name?”
 “What is that to you?”
 “He is Pablo,” said the old man. The man with the carbine looked at them both
sullenly.
 “Good. I have heard much good of you,” said Robert Jordan.
 “What have you heard of me?” asked Pablo.
 “I have heard that you are an excellent guerilla leader, that you are loyal to the
republic and prove your loyalty through your acts, and that you are a man both serious
and valiant. I bring you greetings from the General Staff.”
 “Where did you hear all this?” asked Pablo. Robert Jordan registered that he was not
taking any of the flattery.
 “I heard it from Buitrago to the Escorial,” he said, naming all the stretch of country on
the other side of the lines.
 “I know no one in Buitrago nor in Escorial,” Pablo told him.
 “There are many people on the other side of the mountains who were not there before.
Where are you from?”
 “Avila. What are you going to do with the dynamite?”
 “Blow up a bridge.”
 “What bridge?”
 “That is my business.”
 “If it is in this territory, it is my business. You cannot blow bridges close to where you
live. You must live in one place and operate in another. I know my business. One who is
alive, now, after a year, knows his business.”
 “This is my business,” Robert Jordan said. “We can discuss it together. Do you wish to
help us with the sacks?”
 “No,” said Pablo and shook his head.
 The old man turned toward him suddenly and spoke rapidly and furiously in a dialect
that Robert Jordan could just follow. It was like reading Quevedo. Anselmo was
speaking old Castilian and it went something like this, “Art thou a brute? Yes. Art thou a
beast? Yes, many times Hast thou a brain? Nay. None. Now we come for something of
“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway 8
consummate importance and thee, with thy dwelling place to be undisturbed, puts thy
fox-hole before the interests of humanity. Before the interests of thy people. I this and
that in the this and that of thy father. I this and that and that in thy this. Pick up that bag.”
 Pablo looked down.
 “Every one has to do what he can do according to how it can be truly done,” he said. “I
live here and I operate beyond Segovia. If you make a disturbance here, we will be
hunted out of these mountains. It is only by doing nothing here that we are able to live in
these mountains. It is the principle of the fox.”
 “Yes,” said Anselmo bitterly. “It is the principle of the fox when we need the wolf.”
 “I am more wolf than thee,” Pablo said and Robert Jordan knew that he would pick up
the sack.
 “Hi. Ho. . . ,” Anselmo looked at him. “Thou art more wolf than me and I am sixty-eight
years old.”
 He spat on the ground and shook his head.
 “You have that many years?” Robert Jordan asked, seeing that now, for the moment,
it would be all right and trying to make it go easier.
 “Sixty-eight in the month of July.”
 “If we should ever see that month,” said Pablo. “Let me help you with the pack,” he
said to Robert Jordan. “Leave the other to the old man.” He spoke, not sullenly, but
almost sadly now. “He is an old man of great strength.”
 “I will carry the pack,” Robert Jordan said.
 “Nay,” said the old man. “Leave it to this other strong man.”
 “I will take it,” Pablo told him, and in his sullenness there was a sadness that was
disturbing to Robert Jordan. He knew that sadness and to see it here worried him.
 “Give me the carbine then,” he said and when Pablo handed it to him, he slung it over
his back and, with the two men climbing ahead of him, they went heavily, pulling and
climbing up the granite shelf and over its upper edge to where there was a green
clearing in the forest.
 They skirted the edge of the little meadow and Robert Jordan, striding easily now
without the pack, the carbine pleasantly rigid over his shoulder after the heavy, sweating
pack weight, noticed that the grass was cropped down in several places and signs that
picket pins had been driven into the earth. He could see a trail through the grass where
horses had been led to the stream to drink and there was the fresh manure of several
horses. They picket them here to feed at night and keep them out of sight in the timber
in the daytime, he thought. I wonder how many horses this Pablo has?
 He remembered now noticing, without realizing it, that Pablo’s trousers were worn
soapy shiny in the knees and thighs. I wonder if he has a pair of boots or if he rides in
those alpargatas, he thought. He must have quite an outfit. But I don’t like that sadness,
he thought. That sadness is bad. That’s the sadness they get before they quit or before
they betray. That is the sadness that comes before the sell-out.
 Ahead of them a horse whinnied in the timber and then, through the brown trunks of
the pine trees, only a little sunlight coming down through their thick, almost-touching
tops, he saw the corral made by roping around the tree trunks. The horses had their
heads pointed toward the men as they approached, and at the foot of a tree, outside the
corral, the saddles were piled together and covered with a tarpaulin.
 As they came up, the two men with the packs stopped, and Robert Jordan knew it was
for him to admire the horses.
 “Yes,” he said. “They are beautiful.” He turned to Pablo. “You have your cavalry and
all.”
 There were five horses in the rope corral, three bays, a sorrel, and a buckskin. Sorting
them out carefully with his eyes after he had seen them first together, Robert Jordan
looked them over individually. Pablo and Anselmo knew how good they were and while
Pablo stood now proud and less sad-looking, watching them lovingly, the old man acted
as though they were some great surprise that he had produced, suddenly, himself.
 “How do they look to you?” he asked.
“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway 9
 “All these I have taken,” Pablo said and Robert Jordan was pleased to hear him speak
proudly.
 “That,” said Robert Jordan, pointing to one of the bays, a big stallion with a white blaze
on his forehead and a single white foot, the near front, “is much horse.”
 He was a beautiful horse that looked as though he had come out of a painting by
Velasquez.
 “They are all good,” said Pablo. “You know horses?”
 “Yes.”
 “Less bad,” said Pablo. “Do you see a defect in one of these?”
 Robert Jordan knew that now his papers were being examined by the man who could
not read.
 The horses all still had their heads up looking at the man. Robert Jordan slipped
through between the double rope of the corral and slapped the buckskin on the haunch.
He leaned back against the ropes of the enclosure and watched the horses circle the
corral, stood watching them a minute more, as they stood still, then leaned down and
came out through the ropes.
 “The sorrel is lame in the off hind foot,” he said to Pablo, not looking at him. “The hoof
is split and although it might not get worse soon if shod properly, she could break down
if she travels over much hard ground.”
 “The hoof was like that when we took her,” Pablo said.
 “The best horse that you have, the white-faced bay stallion, has a swelling on the
upper part of the cannon bone that I do not like.”
 “It is nothing,” said Pablo. “He knocked it three days ago. If it were to be anything it
would have become so already.”
 He pulled back the tarpaulin and showed the saddles. There were two ordinary
vaquero’s or herdsman’s saddles, like American stock saddles, one very ornate
vaquero’s saddle, with hand-tooled leather and heavy, hooded stirrups, and two military
saddles in black leather.
 “We killed a pair of guardia civil,” he said, explaining the military saddles.
 “That is big game.”
 “They had dismounted on the road between Segovia and Santa Maria del Real. They
had dismounted to ask papers of the driver of a cart. We were able to kill them without
injuring the horses.”
 “Have you killed many civil guards?” Robert Jordan asked.
 “Several,” Pablo said. “But only these two without injury to the horses.”
 “It was Pablo who blew up the train at Arevalo,” Anselmo said. “That was Pablo.”
 “There was a foreigner with us who made the explosion,” Pablo said. “Do you know
him?”
 “What is he called?”
 “I do not remember. It was a very rare name.”
 “What did he look like?”
 “He was fair, as you are, but not as tall and with large hands and a broken nose.”
 “Kashkin,” Robert Jordan said. “That would be Kashkin.”
 “Yes,” said Pablo. “It was a very rare name. Something like that. What has become of
him?”
 “He is dead since April.”
 “That is what happens to everybody,” Pablo said, gloomily. “That is the way we will all
finish.”
 “That is the way all men end,” Anselmo said. “That is the way men have always
ended. What is the matter with you, man? What hast thou in the stomach?”
 “They are very strong,” Pablo said. It was as though he were talking to himself. He
looked at the horses gloomily. “You do not realize how strong they are. I see them
always stronget always better armed. Always with more material. Here am I with horses
like these. And what can I look forward to? To be hunted and to die. Nothing more.”
 “You hunt as much as you are hunted,” Anselmo said.
“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway 10
 “No,” said Pablo. “Not any more. And if we leave these mountains now, where can we
go? Answer me that? Where now?”
 “In Spain there are many mountains. There are the Sierra de Gredos if one leaves
here.”
 “Not for me,” Pablo said. “I am tired of being hunted. Here we are all right. Now if you
blow a bridge here, we will be hunted. If they know we are here and hunt for us with
planes, they will find us. If they send Moors to hunt us out, they will find us and we must
go. I am tired of all this. You hear?” He turned to Robert Jordan. “What right have you, a
foreigner, to come to me and tell me what I must do?”
 “I have not told you anything you must do,” Robert Jordan said to him.
 “You will though,” Pablo said. “There. There is the badness.”
 He pointed at the two heavy packs that they had lowered to the ground while they had
watched the horses. Seeing the horses had seemed to bring this all to a head in him
and seeing that Robert Jordan knew horses had seemed to loosen his tongue. The
three of them stood now by the rope corral and the patchy sunlight shone on the coat of
the bay stallion. Pablo looked at him and then pushed with his foot against the heavy
pack. “There is the badness.”
 “I come only for my duty,” Robert Jordan told him. “I come under orders from those
who are conducting the war. If I ask you to help me, you can refuse and I will find others
who will help me. I have not even asked you for help yet. I have to do what I am ordered
to do and I can promise you of its importance. That I am a foreigner is not my fault. I
would rather have been born here.”
 “To me, now, the most important is that we be not disturbed here,” Pablo said. “To me,
now, my duty is to those who are with me and to myself.”
 “Thyself. Yes,” Anselmo said. “Thyself now since a long time. Thyself and thy horses.
Until thou hadst horses thou wert with us. Now thou art another capitalist more.”
 “That is unjust,” said Pablo. “I expose the horses all the time for the cause.”
 “Very little,” said Anselmo scornfully. “Very little in my judgment. To steal, yes. To eat
well, yes. To murder, yes. To fight, no.”
 “You are an old man who will make himself trouble with his mouth.”
 “I am an old man who is afraid of no one,” Anselmo told him. “Also I am an old man
without horses.”
 “You are an old man who may not live long.”
 “I am an old man who will live until I die,” Anselmo said. “And I am not afraid of foxes.”
 Pablo said nothing but picked up the pack.
 “Nor of wolves either,” Anselmo said, picking up the other pack. “If thou art a wolf.”
 “Shut thy mouth,” Pablo said to him. “Thou art an old man who always talks too much.”
 “And would do whatever he said he would do,” Anselmo said, bent under the pack.
“And who now is hungry. And thirsty. Go on, guerilla leader with the sad face. Lead us to
something to eat.”
 It is starting badly enough, Robert Jordan thought. But Anselmo’s a man. They are
wonderful when they are good, he thought. There is no people like them when they are
good and when they go bad there is no people that is worse. Anselmo must have known
what he was doing when he brought us here. But I don’t like it. I don’t like any of it.
 The only good sign was that Pablo was carrying the pack and that he had given him
the carbine. Perhaps he is always like that, Robert Jordan thought. Maybe he is just one
of the gloomy ones.
 No, he said to himself, don’t fool yourself. You do not know how he was before; but
you do know that he is going bad fast and without hiding it. When he starts to hide it he
will have made a decision. Remember that, he told himself. The first friendly thing he
does, he will have made a decision. They are awfully good horses, though, he thought,
beautiful horses. I wonder what could make me feel the way those horses make Pablo
feel. The old man was right. The horses made him rich and as soon as he was rich he
wanted to enjoy life. Pretty soon he’ll feel bad because he can’t join the Jockey Club, I
guess, he thought. Pauvre Pablo. Il a manqué son Jockey.
“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway 11
 That idea made him feel better. He grinned, looking at the two bent backs and the big
packs ahead of him moving through the trees. He had not made any jokes with himself
all day and now that he had made one he felt much better. You’re getting to be as all the
rest of them, he told himself. You’re getting gloomy, too. He’d certainly been solemn and
gloomy with Golz. The job had overwhelmed him a little. Slightly overwhelmed, he
thought. Plenty overwhelmed. Golz was gay and he had wanted him to be gay too
before he left, but he hadn’t been.
 All the best ones, when you thought it over, were gay. It was much better to be gay
and it was a sign of something too. It was like having immortality while you were still
alive. That was a complicated one. There were not many of them left though. No, there
were not many of the gay ones left. There were very damned few of them left. And if you
keep on thinking like that, my boy, you won’t be left either. Turn off the thinking now, old
timer, old comrade. You’re a bridge-blower now. Not a thinker. Man, I’m hungry, he
thought. I hope Pablo eats well.
2
 They had come through the heavy timber to the cup-shaped upper end of the little
valley and he saw where the camp must be under the rim-rock that rose ahead of them
through the trees.
 That was the camp all right and it was a good camp. You did not see it at all until you
were up to it and Robert Jordan knew it could not be spotted from the air. Nothing would
show from above. It was as well hidden as a bear’s den. But it seemed to be little better
guarded. He looked at it carefully as they came up.
 There was a large cave in the rim-rock formation and beside the opening a man sat
with his back against the rock, his legs stretched out on the ground and his carbine
leaning against the rock. He was cutting away on a stick with a knife and he stared at
them as they came up, then went on whittling.
 “Hola,” said the seated man. “What is this that comes?”
 “The old man and a dynamiter,” Pablo told him and lowered the pack inside the
entrance to the cave. Anselmo lowered his pack, too, and Robert Jordan unslung the
rifle and leaned it against the rock.
 “Don’t leave it so close to the cave,” the whittling man, who had blue eyes in a dark,
good-looking lazy gypsy face, the color of smoked leather, said. “There’s a fire in there.”
 “Get up and put it away thyself,” Pablo said. “Put it by that tree.”
 The gypsy did not move but said something unprintable, then, “Leave it there. Blow
thyself up,” he said lazily. “Twill cure thy diseases.”
 “What do you make?” Robert Jordan sat down by the gypsy. The gypsy showed him. It
was a figure four trap and he was whittling the crossbar for it.
 “For foxes,” he said. “With a log for a dead-fall. It breaks their backs.” He grinned at
Jordan. “Like this, see?” He made a motion of the framework of the trap collapsing, the
log falling, then shook his head, drew in his hand, and spread his arms to show the fox
with a broken back. “Very practical,” he explained.
 “He catches rabbits,” Anselmo said. “He is a gypsy. So if he catches rabbits he says it
is foxes. If he catches a fox he would say it was an elephant.”
 “And if I catch an elephant?” the gypsy asked and showed his white teeth again and
winked at Robert Jordan.
 “You’d say it was a tank,” Anselmo told him.
 “I’ll get a tank,” the gypsy told him. “I will get a tank. And you can say it is what you
please.”
 “Gypsies talk much and kill little,” Anselmo told him.
 The gypsy winked at Robert Jordan and went on whittling.
 Pablo had gone in out of sight in the cave. Robert Jordan hoped he had gone for food.
He sat on the ground by the gypsy and the afternoon sunlight came down through the
tree tops and was warm on his outstretched legs. He could smell food now in the cave,
“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway 12
the smell of oil and of onions and of meat frying and his stomach moved with hunger
inside of him.
 “We can get a tank,” he said to the gypsy. “It is not too difficult.”
 “With this?” the gypsy pointed toward the two sacks.
 “Yes,” Robert Jordan told him. “I will teach you. You make a trap. It is not too difficult.”
 “You and me?”
 “Sure,” said Robert Jordan. “Why not?”
 “Hey,” the gypsy said to Anselmo. “Move those two sacks to where they will be safe,
will you? They’re valuable.”
 Anselmo grunted. “I am going for wine,” he told Robert Jordan. Robert Jordan got up
and lifted the sacks away from the cave entrance and leaned them, one on each side of
a tree trunk. He knew what was in them and he never liked to see them close together.
 “Bring a cup for me,” the gypsy told him.
 “Is there wine?” Robert Jordan asked, sitting down again by the gypsy.
 “Wine? Why not? A whole skinful. Half a skinful, anyway.”
 “And what to eat?”
 “Everything, man,” the gypsy said. “We eat like generals.”
 “And what do gypsies do in the war?” Robert Jordan asked him.
 “They keep on being gypsies.”
 “That’s a good job.”
 “The best,” the gypsy said. “How do they call thee?”
 “Roberto. And thee?”
 “Rafael. And this of the tank is serious?”
 “Surely. Why not?”
 Anselmo came out of the mouth of the cave with a deep stone basin full of red wine
and with his fingers through the handles of three cups. “Look,” he said. “They have cups
and all.” Pablo came out behind them.
 “There is food soon,” he said. “Do you have tobacco?”
 Robert Jordan went over to the packs and opening one, felt inside an inner pocket and
brought out one of the flat boxes of Russian cigarettes he had gotten at Golz’s
headquarters. He ran his thumbnail around the edge of the box and, opening the lid,
handed them to Pablo who took half a dozen. Pablo, holding them in one of his huge
hands, picked one up and looked at it against the light. They were long narrow
cigarettes with pasteboard cylinders for mouthpieces.
 “Much air and little tobacco,” he said. “I know these. The other with the rare name had
them.”
 “Kashkin,” Robert Jordan said and offered the cigarettes to the gypsy and Anselmo,
who each took one.
 “Take more,” he said and they each took another. He gave them each four more, they
making a double nod with the hand holding the cigarettes so that the cigarette dipped its
end as a man salutes with a sword, to thank him.
 “Yes,” Pablo said. “It was a rare name.”
 “Here is the wine.” Anselmo dipped a cup out of the bowl and handed it to Robert
Jordan, then dipped for himself and the gypsy.
 “Is there no wine for me?” Pablo asked. They were all sitting together by the cave
entrance.
 Anselmo handed him his cup and went into the cave for another. Coming out he
leaned over the bowl and dipped the cup full and they all touched cup edges.
 The wine was good, tasting faintly resinous from the wineskin, but excellent, light and
clean on his tongue. Robert Jordan drank it slowly, feeling it spread warmly through his
tiredness.
 “The food comes shortly,” Pablo said. “And this foreigner with the rare name, how did
he die?”
 “He was captured and he killed himself.”
 “How did that happen?”
“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway 13
 “He was wounded and he did not wish to be a prisoner.”
 “What were the details?”
 “I don’t know,” he lied. He knew the details very well and he knew they would not
make good talking now.
 “He made us promise to shoot him in case he were wounded at the business of the
train and should be unable to get away,” Pablo said. “He spoke in a very rare manner.”
 He must have been jumpy even then, Robert Jordan thought. Poor old Kashkin.
 “He had a prejudice against killing himself,” Pablo said. “He told me that. Also he had
a great fear of being tortured.”
 “Did he tell you that, too?” Robert Jordan asked him.
 “Yes,” the gypsy said. “He spoke like that to all of us.”
 “Were you at the train, too?”
 “Yes. All of us were at the train.”
 “He spoke in a very rare manner,” Pablo said. “But he was very brave.”
 Poor old Kashkin, Robert Jordan thought. He must have been doing more harm than
good around here. I wish I would have known he was that jumpy as far back as then.
They should have Pulled him out. You can’t have people around doing this sort of Work
and talking like that. That is no way to talk. Even if they accomplish their mission they
are doing more harm than good, talking that sort of stuff.
 “He was a little strange,” Robert Jordan said. “I think he was a little crazy.”
 “But very dexterous at producing explosions,” the gypsy said. “And very brave.”
 “But crazy,” Robert Jordan said. “In this you have to have very much head and be very
cold in the head. That was no way to talk.”
 “And you,” Pablo said. “If you are wounded in such a thing as this bridge, you would
be willing to be left behind?”
 “Listen,” Robert Jordan said and, leaning forward, he dipped himself another cup of
the wine. “Listen to me clearly. If ever I should have any little favors to ask of any man, I
will ask him at the time.”
 “Good,” said the gypsy approvingly. “In this way speak the good ones. Ah! Here it
comes.”
 “You have eaten,” said Pablo.
 “And I can eat twice more,” the gypsy told him. “Look now who brings it.”
 The girl stooped as she came out of the cave mouth carrying the big iron cooking
platter and Robert Jordan saw her face turned at an angle and at the same time saw the
strange thing about her. She smiled and said, “Hola, Comrade,” and Robert Jordan said,
“Salud,” and was careful not to stare and not to look away. She set down the flat iron
platter in front of him and he noticed her handsome brown hands. Now she looked him
full in the face and smiled. Her teeth were white in her brown face and her skin and her
eyes were the same golden tawny brown. She had high cheekbones, merry eyes and a
straight mouth with full lips. Her hair was the golden brown of a grain field that has been
burned dark in the sun but it was cut short all over her head so that it was but little
longer than the fur on a beaver pelt. She smiled in Robert Jordan’s face and put her
brown hand up and ran it over her head, flattening the hair which rose again as her hand
passed. She has a beautiful face, Robert Jordan thought. She’d be beautiful if they
hadn’t cropped her hair.
 “That is the way I comb it,” she said to Robert Jordan and laughed. “Go ahead and
eat. Don’t stare at me. They gave me this haircut in Valladolid. It’s almost grown out
now.”
 She sat down opposite him and looked at him. He looked back at her and she smiled
and folded her hands together over her knees. Her legs slanted long and clean from the
open cuffs of the trousers as she sat with her hands across her knees and he could see
the shape of her small up-tilted breasts under the gray shirt. Every time Robert Jordan
looked at her he could feel a thickness in his throat.
 “There are no plates,” Anselmo said. “Use your own knife.” The girl had leaned four
forks, tines down, against the sides of the iron dish.
“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway 14
 They were all eating out of the platter, not speaking, as is the Spanish custom. It was
rabbit cooked with onions and green peppers and there were chick peas in the red wine
sauce. It was well cooked, the rabbit meat flaked off the bones, and the sauce was
delicious. Robert Jordan drank another cup of wine while he ate. The girl watched him
all through the meal. Every one else was watching his food and eating. Robert Jordan
wiped up the last of the sauce in front of him with a piece of bread, piled the rabbit
bones to one side, wiped the spot where they had been for sauce, then wiped his fork
clean with the bread, wiped his knife and put it away and ate the bread. He leaned over
and dipped his cup full of wine and the girl still watched him.
 Robert Jordan drank half the cup of wine but the thickness still came in his throat
when he spoke to the girl.
 “How art thou called?” he asked. Pablo looked at him quickly when he heard the tone
of his voice. Then he got up and walked away.
 “Maria. And thee?”
 “Roberto. Have you been long in the mountains?”
 “Three months.”
 “Three months?” He looked at her hair, that was as thick and short and rippling when
she passed her hand over it, now in embarrassment, as a grain field in the wind on a
hillside. “It was shaved,” she said. “They shaved it regularly in the prison at Valladolid. It
has taken three months to grow to this. I was on the train. They were taking me to the
south. Many of the prisoners were caught after the train was blown up but I was not. I
came With these.”
 “I found her hidden in the rocks,” the gypsy said. “It was when we were leaving. Man,
but this one was ugly. We took her along but many times I thought we would have to
leave her.”
 “And the other one who was with them at the train?” asked Maria. “The other blond
one. The foreigner. Where is he?”
 “Dead,” Robert Jordan said. “In April.”
 “In April? The train was in April.”
 “Yes,” Robert Jordan said. “He died ten days after the train.”
 “Poor man,” she said. “He was very brave. And you do that same business?”
 “Yes.”
 “You have done trains, too?”
 “Yes. Three trains.”
 “Here?”
 “In Estremadura,” he said. “I was in Estremadura before I came here. We do very
much in Estremadura. There are many of us working in Estremadura.”
 “And why do you come to these mountains now?”
 “I take the place of the other blond one. Also I know this country from before the
movement.”
 “You know it well?”
 “No, not really well. But I learn fast. I have a good map and I have a good guide.”
 “The old man,” she nodded. “The old man is very good.”
 “Thank you,” Anselmo said to her and Robert Jordan realized suddenly that he and
the girl were not alone and he realized too that it was hard for him to look at her
because it made his voice change so. He was violating the second rule of the two rules
for getting on well with people that speak Spanish; give the men tobacco and leave the
women alone; and he realized, very suddenly, that he did not care. There were so many
things that he had not to care about, why should he care about that?
 “You have a very beautiful face,” he said to Maria. “I wish I would have had the luck to
see you before your hair was cut.”
 “It will grow out,” she said. “In six months it will be long enough.”
 “You should have seen her when we brought her from the train. She was so ugly it
would make you sick.”
 “Whose woman are you?” Robert Jordan asked, trying not to pull out of it. “Are you
“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway 15
Pablo’s?”
 She looked at him and laughed, then slapped him on the knee.
 “Of Pablo? You have seen Pablo?”
 “Well, then, of Rafael. I have seen Rafael.”
 “Of Rafael neither.”
 “Of no one,” the gypsy said. “This is a very strange woman. Is of no one. But she
cooks well.”
 “Really of no one?” Robert Jordan asked her.
 “Of no one. No one. Neither in joke nor in seriousness. Nor of thee either.”
 “No?” Robert Jordan said and he could feel the thickness coming in his throat again.
“Good. I have no time for any woman. That is true.”
 “Not fifteen minutes?” the gypsy asked teasingly. “Not a quarter of an hour?” Robert
Jordan did not answer. He looked at the girl, Maria, and his throat felt too thick for him to
trust himself to speak.
 Maria looked at him and laughed, then blushed suddenly but kept on looking at him.
 “You are blushing,” Robert Jordan said to her. “Do you blush much?”
 “Never.”
 “You are blushing now.”
 “Then I will go into the cave.”
 “Stay here, Maria.”
 “No,” she said and did not smile at him. “I will go into the cave now.” She picked up the
iron plate they had eaten from and the four forks. She moved awkwardly as a colt
moves, but with that same grace as of a young animal.
 “Do you want the cups?” she asked.
 Robert Jordan was still looking at her and she blushed again.
 “Don’t make me do that,” she said. “I do not like to do that.”
 “Leave them,” they gypsy said to her. “Here,” he dipped into the stone bowl and
handed the full cup to Robert Jordan who Watched the girl duck her head and go into
the cave carrying the heavy iron dish.
 “Thank you,” Robert Jordan said. His voice was all right again, now that she was
gone. “This is the last one. We’ve had enough of this.”
 “We will finish the bowl,” the gypsy said. “There is over half a skin. We packed it in on
one of the horses.”
 “That was the last raid of Pablo,” Anselmo said. “Since then he has done nothing.”
 “How many are you?” Robert Jordan asked.
 “We are seven and there are two women.”
 “Two?”
 “Yes. The mujer of Pablo.”
 “And she?”
 “In the cave. The girl can cook a little. I said she cooks well to please her. But mostly
she helps the mujer of Pablo.”
 “And how is she, the mujer of Pablo?”
 “Something barbarous,” the gypsy grinned. “Something very barbarous. If you think
Pablo is ugly you should see his woman. But brave. A hundred times braver than Pablo.
But something barbarous.”
 “Pablo was brave in the beginning,” Anselmo said. “Pablo was something serious in
the beginning.”
 “He killed more people than the cholera,” the gypsy said. “At the start of the
movement, Pablo killed more people than the typhoid fever.”
 “But since a long time he is muy flojo,” Anselmo said. “He is very flaccid. He is very
much afraid to die.”
 “It is possible that it is because he has killed so many at the beginning,” the gypsy said
philosophically. “Pablo killed more than the bubonic plague.”
 “That and the riches,” Anselmo said. “Also he drinks very much. Now he would like to
retire like a matador de toros. Like a bullfighter. But he cannot retire.”
“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway 16
 “If he crosses to the other side of the lines they will take his horses and make him go
in the army,” the gypsy said. “In me there is no love for being in the army either.”
 “Nor is there in any other gypsy,” Anselmo said.
 “Why should there be?” the gypsy asked. “Who wants to be in an army? Do we make
the revolution to be in an army? I am willing to fight but not to be in an army.”
 “Where are the others?” asked Robert Jordan. He felt comfortable and sleepy now
from the wine and lying back on the floor of the forest he saw through the tree tops the
small afternoon clouds of the mountains moving slowly in the high Spanish sky.
 “There are two asleep in the cave,” the gypsy said. “Two are on guard above where
we have the gun. One is on guard below. They are probably all asleep.”
 Robert Jordan rolled over on his side.
 “What kind of a gun is it?”
 “A very rare name,” the gypsy said. “It has gone away from me for the moment. It is a
machine gun.”
 It must be an automatic rifle, Robert Jordan thought.
 “How much does it weigh?” he asked.
 “One man can carry it but it is heavy. It has three legs that fold. We got it in the last
serious raid. The one before the wine.”
 “How many rounds have you for it?”
 “An infinity,” the gypsy said. “One whole case of an unbelievable heaviness.”
 Sounds like about five hundred rounds, Robert Jordan thought.
 “Does it feed from a pan or a belt?”
 “From round iron cans on the top of the gun.”
 Hell, it’s a Lewis gun, Robert Jordan thought.
 “Do you know anything about a machine gun?” he asked the old man.
 “Nada,” said Anselmo. “Nothing.”
 “And thou?” to the gypsy.
 “That they fire with much rapidity and become so hot the barrel burns the hand that
touches it,” the gypsy said proudly.
 “Every one knows that,” Anselmo said with contempt.
 “Perhaps,” the gypsy said. “But he asked me to tell what I know about a máquina and I
told him.” Then he added, “Also, unlike an ordinary rifle, they continue to fire as long as
you exert pressure on the trigger.”
 “Unless they jam, run out of ammunition or get so hot they melt,” Robert Jordan said in
English.
 “What do you say?” Anselmo asked him.
 “Nothing,” Robert Jordan said. “I was only looking into the future in English.”
 “That is something truly rare,” the gypsy said. “Looking into the future in Inglés. Can
you read in the palm of the hand?”
 “No,” Robert Jordan said and he dipped another cup of wine. “But if thou canst I wish
thee would read in the palm of my hand and tell me what is going to pass in the next
three days.”
 “The mujer of Pablo reads in the hands,” the gypsy said. “But she is so irritable and of
such a barbarousness that I do not know if she will do it.”
 Robert Jordan sat up now and took a swallow of the wine.
 “Let us see the mujer of Pablo now,” he said. “If it is that bad let us get it over with.”
 “I would not disturb her,” Rafael said. “She has a strong hatred for me.”
 “Why?”
 “She treats me as a time waster.”
 “What injustice,” Anselmo taunted.
 “She is against gypsies.”
 “What an error,” Anselmo said.
 “She has gypsy blood,” Rafael said. “She knows of what she speaks.” He grinned.
“But she has a tongue that scalds and that bites like a bull whip. With this tongue she
takes the hide from any one. In strips. She is of an unbelievable barbarousness.”
“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway 17
 “How does she get along with the girl, Maria?” Robert Jordan asked.
 “Good. She likes the girl. But let any one come near her seriously—” He shook his
head and clucked with his tongue.
 “She is very good with the girl,” Anselmo said. “She takes good care of her.”
 “When we picked the girl up at the time of the train she was very strange,” Rafael said.
“She would not speak and she cried all the time and if any one touched her she would
shiver like a wet dog. Only lately has she been better. Lately she has been much better.
Today she was fine. Just now, talking to you, she was very good. We would have left
her after the train. Certainly it was not worth being delayed by something so sad and
ugly and apparently worthless. But the old woman tied a rope to her and when the girl
thought she could not go further, the old woman beat her with the end of the rope to
make her go. Then when she could not really go further, the old woman carried her over
her shoulder. When the old woman could not carry her, I carried her. We were going up
that hill breast high in the gorse and heather. And when I could no longer carry her,
Pablo carried her. But what the old woman had to say to us to make us do it!” He shook
his head at the memory. “It is true that the girl is long in the legs but is not heavy. The
bones are light and she weighs little. But she weighs enough when we had to carry her
and stop to fire and then carry her again with the old woman lashing at Pablo with the
rope and carrying his rifle, putting it in his hand when he would drop the girl, making him
pick her up again and loading the gun for him while she cursed him; taking the shells
from his pouches and shoving them down into the magazine and cursing him. The dusk
was coming well on then and when the night came it was all right. But it was lucky that
they had no cavalry.”
 “It must have been very hard at the train,” Anselmo said. “I was not there,” he
explained to Robert Jordan. “There was the band of Pablo, of El Sordo, whom we will
see tonight, and two other bands of these mountains. I had gone to the other side of the
lines.”
 “In addition to the blond one with the rare name—” the gypsy said.
 “Kashkin.”
 “Yes. It is a name I can never dominate. We had two with a machine gun. They were
sent also by the army. They could not get the gun away and lost it. Certainly it weighed
no more than that girl and if the old woman had been over them they would have gotten
it away.” He shook his head remembering, then went on. “Never in my life have I seen
such a thing as when the explosion Was produced. The train was coming steadily. We
saw it far away. And I had an excitement so great that I cannot tell it. We saw steam
from it and then later came the noise of the whistle. Then it came chu-chu-chu-chu-chuchu steadily larger and larger and then, at the moment of the explosion, the front wheels
of the engine rose up and all of the earth seemed to rise in a great cloud of blackness
and a roar and the engine rose high in the cloud of dirt and of the Wooden ties rising in
the air as in a dream and then it fell onto its side like a great wounded animal and there
was an explosion of white steam before the clods of the other explosion had ceased to
fall on us and the máquina commenced to speak ta-tat-tat-ta!” went the gypsy shaking
his two clenched fists up and down in front of him, thumbs up, on an imaginary machine
gun. “Ta! Ta! Tat! Tat! Tat! Ta!” he exulted. “Never in my life have I seen such a thing,
with the troops running from the train and the máquina speaking into them and the men
falling. It was then that I put my hand on the máquina in my excitement and discovered
that the barrel burned and at that moment the old woman slapped me on the side of the
face and said, ‘Shoot, you fool! Shoot or I will kick your brains in!’ Then I commenced to
shoot but it was very hard to hold my gun steady and the troops were running up the far
hill. Later, after we had been down at the train to see what there was to take, an officer
forced some troops back toward us at the point of a pistol. He kept waving the pistol and
shouting at them and we were all shooting at him but no one hit him. Then some troops
lay down and commenced firing and the officer walked up and down behind them with
his pistol and still we could not hit him and the máquina could not fire on him because of
the position of the train. This officer shot two men as they lay and still they would not get
“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway 18
up and he was cursing them and finally they got up, one two and three at a time and
came running toward us and the train. Then they lay flat again and fired. Then we left,
with the máquina still speaking over us as we left. It was then I found the girl where she
had run from the train to the rocks and she ran with us. It was those troops who hunted
us until that night.”
 “It must have been something very hard,” Anselmo said. “Of much emotion.”
 “It was the only good thing we have done,” said a deep voice. “What are you doing
now, you lazy drunken obscene unsayable son of an unnameable unmarried gypsy
obscenity? What are you doing?”
 Robert Jordan saw a woman of about fifty almost as big as Pablo, almost as wide as
she was tall, in black peasant skirt and waist, with heavy wool socks on heavy legs,
black rope-soled shoes and a brown face like a model for a granite monument. She had
big but nice-looking hands and her thick curly black hair was twisted into a knot on her
neck.
 “Answer me,” she said to the gypsy, ignoring the others.
 “I was talking to these comrades. This one comes as a dynamiter.”
 “I know all that,” the mujer of Pablo said. “Get out of here now and relieve Andrés who
is on guard at the top.”
 “Me voy,” the gypsy said. “I go.” He turned to Robert Jordan. “I will see thee at the
hour of eating.”
 “Not even in a joke,” said the woman to him. “Three times you have eaten today
according to my count. Go now and send me Andrés.
 “Hola,” she said to Robert Jordan and put out her hand and smiled. “How are you and
how is everything in the Republic?”
 “Good,” he said and returned her strong hand grip. “Both with me and with the
Republic.”
 “I am happy,” she told him. She was looking into his face and smiling and he noticed
she had fine gray eyes. “Do you come for us to do another train?”
 “No,” said Robert Jordan, trusting her instantly. “For a bridge.”
 “No es nada,” she said. “A bridge is nothing. When do we do another train now that we
have horses?”
 “Later. This bridge is of great importance.”
 “The girl told me your comrade who was with us at the train is dead.”
 “Yes.”
 “What a pity. Never have I seen such an explosion. He was a man of talent. He
pleased me very much. It is not possible to do another train now? There are many men
here now in the hills. Too many. It is already hard to get food. It would be better to get
out. And we have horses.”
 “We have to do this bridge.”
 “Where is it?”
 “Quite close.”
 “All the better,” the mujer of Pablo said. “Let us blow all the bridges there are here and
get out. I am sick of this place. Here is too much concentration of people. No good can
come of it. Here is a stagnation that is repugnant.”
 She sighted Pablo through the trees.
 “Borracho!” she called to him. “Drunkard. Rotten drunkard!” She turned back to Robert
Jordan cheerfully. “He’s taken a leather wine bottle to drink alone in the woods,” she
said. “He’s drinking all the time. This life is ruining him. Young man, I am very content
that you have come.” She clapped him on the back. “Ah,” she said. “You’re bigger than
you look,” and ran her hand over his shoulder, feeling the muscle under the flannel shirt.
“Good. I am very content that you have come.”
 “And I equally.”
 “We will understand each other,” she said. “Have a cup of wine.”
 “We have already had some,” Robert Jordan said. “But, will you?”
 “Not until dinner,” she said. “It gives me heartburn.” Then she sighted Pablo again.
“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway 19
“Borracho! ” she shouted. “Drunkard!” She turned to Robert Jordan and shook her head.
“He was a very good man,” she told him. “But now he is terminated. And listen to me
about another thing. Be very good and careful about the girl. The Maria. She has had a
bad time. Understandest thou?”
 “Yes. Why do you say this?”
 “I saw how she was from seeing thee when she came into the cave. I saw her
watching thee before she came out.”
 “I joked with her a little.”
 “She was in a very bad state,” the woman of Pablo said. “Now she is better, she ought
to get out of here.”
 “Clearly, she can be sent through the lines with Anselmo.”
 “You and the Anselmo can take her when this terminates.”
 Robert Jordan felt the ache in his throat and his voice thickening. “That might be
done,” he said.
 The mujer of Pablo looked at him and shook her head. “Ayee. Ayee,” she said. “Are all
men like that?”
 “I said nothing. She is beautiful, you know that.”
 “No she is not beautiful. But she begins to be beautiful, you mean,” the woman of
Pablo said. “Men. It is a shame to us women that we make them. No. In seriousness.
Are there not homes to care for such as her under the Republic?”
 “Yes,” said Robert Jordan. “Good places. On the coast near Valencia. In other places
too. There they will treat her well and she can work with children. There are the children
from evacuated villages. They will teach her the work.”
 “That is what I want,” the mujer of Pablo said. “Pablo has a sickness for her already. It
is another thing which destroys him. It lies on him like a sickness when he sees her. It is
best that she goes now.”
 “We can take her after this is over.”
 “And you will be careful of her now if I trust you? I speak to you as though I knew you
for a long time.”
 “It is like that,” Robert Jordan said, “when people understand one another.”
 “Sit down,” the woman of Pablo said. “I do not ask any promise because what will
happen, will happen. Only if you will not take her out, then I ask a promise.”
 “Why if I would not take her?”
 “Because I do not want her crazy here after you will go. I have had her crazy before
and I have enough without that.”
 “We will take her after the bridge,” Robert Jordan said. “If we are alive after the bridge,
we will take her.”
 “I do not like to hear you speak in that manner. That manner of speaking never brings
luck.”
 “I spoke in that manner only to make a promise,” Robert Jordan said. “I am not of
those who speak gloomily.”
 “Let me see thy hand,” the woman said. Robert Jordan put his hand out and the
woman opened it, held it in her own big hand, rubbed her thumb over it and looked at it,
carefully, then dropped it. She stood up. He got up too and she looked at him without
smiling.
 “What did you see in it?” Robert Jordan asked her. “I don’t believe in it. You won’t
scare me.”
 “Nothing,” she told him. “I saw nothing in it.”
 “Yes you did. I am only curious. I do not believe in such things.”
 “In what do you believe?”
 “In many things but not in that.”
 “In what?”
 “In my work.”
 “Yes, I saw that.”
 “Tell me what else you saw.”
“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway 20
 “I saw nothing else,” she said bitterly. “The bridge is very difficult you said?”
 “No. I said it is very important.”
 “But it can be difficult?”
 “Yes. And now I go down to look at it. How many men have you here?”
 “Five that are any good. The gypsy is worthless although his intentions are good. He
has a good heart. Pablo I no longer trust.”
 “How many men has El Sordo that are good?”
 “Perhaps eight. We will see tonight. He is coming here. He is a very practical man. He
also has some dynamite. Not very much, though. You will speak with him.”
 “Have you sent for him?”
 “He comes every night. He is a neighbor. Also a friend as well as a comrade.”
 “What do you think of him?”
 “He is a very good man. Also very practical. In the business of the train he was
enormous.”
 “And in the other bands?”
 “Advising them in time, it should be possible to unite fifty rifles of a certain
dependability.”
 “How dependable?”
 “Dependable within the gravity of the situation.”
 “And how many cartridges per rifle?”
 “Perhaps twenty. Depending how many they would bring for this business. If they
would come for this business. Remember thee that in this of a bridge there is no money
and no loot and in thy reservations of talking, much danger, and that afterwards there
must be a moving from these mountains. Many will oppose this of the bridge.”
 “Clearly.”
 “In this way it is better not to speak of it unnecessarily.”
 “I am in accord.”
 “Then after thou hast studied thy bridge we will talk tonight with El Sordo.”
 “I go down now with Anselmo.”
 “Wake him then,” she said. “Do you want a carbine?”
 “Thank you,” he told her. “It is good to have but I will not use it. I go to look, not to
make disturbances. Thank you for what you have told me. I like very much your way of
speaking.”
 “I try to speak frankly.”
 “Then tell me what you saw in the hand.”
 “No,” she said and shook her head. “I saw nothing. Go now to thy bridge. I will look
after thy equipment.”
 “Cover it and that no one should touch it. It is better there than in the cave.”
 “It shall be covered and no one shall touch it,” the woman of Pablo said. “Go now to
thy bridge.”
 “Anselmo,” Robert Jordan said, putting his hand on the shoulder of the old man who
lay sleeping, his head on his arms.
 The old man looked up. “Yes,” he said. “Of course. Let us go.”
3
 They came down the last two hundred yards, moving carefully from tree to tree in the
shadows and now, through the last pines of the steep hillside, the bridge was only fifty
yards away. The late afternoon sun that still came over the brown shoulder of the
mountain showed the bridge dark against the steep emptiness of the gorge. It was a
steel bridge of a single span and there was a sentry box at each end. It was wide
enough for two motor cars to pass and it spanned, in solid-flung metal grace, a deep
gorge at the bottom of which, far below, a brook leaped in white water through rocks and
boulders down to the main stream of the pass.
 The sun was in Robert Jordan’s eyes and the bridge showed only in outline. Then the
“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway 21
sun lessened and was gone and looking up through the trees at the brown, rounded
height that it had gone behind, he saw, now, that he no longer looked into the glare, that
the mountain slope was a delicate new green and that there were patches of old snow
under the crest.
 Then he was watching the bridge again in the sudden short trueness of the little light
that would be left, and studying its construction. The problem of its demolition was not
difficult. As he watched he took out a notebook from his breast pocket and made several
quick line sketches. As he made the drawings he did not figure the charges. He would
do that later. Now he was noting the points where the explosive should be placed in
order to cut the support of the span and drop a section of it into the gorge. It could be
done unhurriedly, scientifically and correctly with a half dozen charges laid and braced
to explode simultaneously; or it could be done roughly with two big ones. They would
need to be very big ones, on opposite sides and should go at the same time. He
sketched quickly and happily; glad at last to have the problem under his hand; glad at
last actually to be engaged upon it. Then he shut his notebook, pushed the pencil into its
leather holder in the edge of the flap, put the notebook in his pocket and buttoned the
pocket.
 While he had sketched, Anselmo had been watching the road, the bridge and the
sentry boxes. He thought they had come too close to the bridge for safety and when the
sketching was finished, he was relieved.
 As Robert Jordan buttoned the flap of his pocket and then lay flat behind the pine
trunk, looking out from behind it, Anselmo put his hand on his elbow and pointed with
one finger.
 In the sentry box that faced toward them up the road, the sentry was sitting holding his
rifle, the bayonet fixed, between his knees. He was smoking a cigarette and he wore a
knitted cap and blanket style cape. At fifty yards, you could not see anything about his
face. Robert Jordan put up his field glasses, shading the lenses carefully with his
cupped hands even though there was now no sun to make a glint, and there was the rail
of the bridge as clear as though you could reach out and touch it and there was the face
of the senty so clear he could see the sunken cheeks, the ash on the cigarette and the
greasy shine of the bayonet. It was a peasant’s face, the cheeks hollow under the high
cheekbones, the beard stubbled, the eyes shaded by the heavy brows, big hands
holding the rifle, heavy boots showing beneath the folds of the blanket cape. There was
a worn, blackened leather wine bottle on the wall of the sentry box, there were some
newspapers and there was no telephone. There could, of course, be a telephone on the
side he could not see; but there were no wires running from the box that were visible. A
telephone line ran along the road and its wires were carried over the bridge. There was
a charcoal brazier outside the sentry box, made from an old petrol tin with the top cut off
and holes punched in it, which rested on two stones; but he held no fire. There were
some fire-blackened empty tins in the ashes under it.
 Robert Jordan handed the glasses to Anselmo who lay flat beside him. The old man
grinned and shook his head. He tapped his skull beside his eye with one finger.
 “Ya lo veo,” he said in Spanish. “I have seen him,” speaking from the front of his
mouth with almost no movement of his lips in the way that is quieter than any whisper.
He looked at the sentry as Robert Jordan smiled at him and, pointing with one finger,
drew the other across his throat. Robert Jordan nodded but he did not smile.
 The sentry box at the far end of the bridge faced away from them and down the road
and they could not see into it. The road, which was broad and oiled and well
constructed, made a turn to the left at the far end of the bridge and then swung out of
sight around a curve to the right. At this point it was enlarged from the old road to its
present width by cutting into the solid bastion of the rock on the far side of the gorge;
and its left or western edge, looking down from the pass and the bridge, was marked
and protected by a line of upright cut blocks of stone where its edge fell sheer away to
the gorge. The gorge was almost a canyon here, where the brook, that the bridge was
flung over, merged with the main stream of the pass.
“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway 22
 “And the other post?” Robert Jordan asked Anselmo.
 “Five hundred meters below that turn. In the roadmender’s hut that is built into the side
of the rock.”
 “How many men?” Robert Jordan asked.
 He was watching the sentry again with his glasses. The sentry rubbed his cigarette out
on the plank wall of the box, then took a leather tobacco pouch from his pocket, opened
the paper of the dead cigarette and emptied the remnant of used tobacco into the
pouch. The sentry stood up, leaned his rifle against the wall of the box and stretched,
then picked up his rifle, slung it over his shoulder and walked out onto the bridge.
Anselmo flattened on the ground and Robert Jordan slipped his glasses into his shirt
pocket and put his head well behind the pine tree.
 “There are seven men and a corporal,” Anselmo said close to his ear. “I informed
myself from the gypsy.”
 “We will go now as soon as he is quiet,” Robert Jordan said. “We are too close.”
 “Hast thou seen what thou needest?”
 “Yes. All that I need.”
 It was getting cold quickly now with the sun down and the light was failing as the
afterglow from the last sunlight on the mountains behind them faded.
 “How does it look to thee?” Anselmo said softly as they watched the sentry walk
across the bridge toward the other box, his bayonet bright in the last of the afterglow, his
figure unshapely in the blanket coat.
 “Very good,” Robert Jordan said. “Very, very good.”
 “I am glad,” Anselmo said. “Should we go? Now there is no chance that he sees us.”
 The sentry was standing, his back toward them, at the far end of the bridge. From the
gorge came the noise of the stream in the boulders. Then through this noise came
another noise, a steady, racketing drone and they saw the sentry looking up, his knitted
cap slanted back, and turning their heads and looking up they saw, high in the evening
sky, three monoplanes in V formation, showing minute and silvery at that height where
there still was sun, passing unbelievably quickly across the sky, their motors now
throbbing steadily.
 “Ours?” Anselmo asked.
 “They seem so,” Robert Jordan said but knew that at that height you never could be
sure. They could be an evening patrol of either side. But you always said pursuit planes
were ours because it made people feel better. Bombers were another matter.
 Anselmo evidently felt the same. “They are ours,” he said. “I recognize them. They are
Moscas.”
 “Good,” said Robert Jordan. “They seem to me to be Moscas, too.”
 “They are Moscas,” Anselmo said.
 Robert Jordan could have put the glasses on them and been sure instantly but he
preferred not to. It made no difference to him who they were tonight and if it pleased the
old man to have them be ours, he did not want to take them away. Now, as they moved
out of sight toward Segovia, they did not look to be the green, red wing-tipped, low wing
Russian conversion of the Boeing P32 that the Spaniards called Moscas. You could not
see the colors but the cut was wrong. No. It was a Fascist Patrol coming home.
 The sentry was still standing at the far box with his back turned.
 “Let us go,” Robert Jordan said. He started up the hill, moving carefully and taking
advantage of the cover until they were out of sight. Anselmo followed him at a hundred
yards distance. When they were well out of sight of the bridge, he stopped and the old
man came up and went into the lead and climbed steadily through the pass, up the
steep slope in the dark.
 “We have a formidable aviation,” the old man said happily.
 “Yes.”
 “And we will win.”
 “We have to win.”
 “Yes. And after we have won you must come to hunt.”
“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway 23
 “To hunt what?”
 “The boar, the bear, the wolf, the ibex—”
 “You like to hunt?”
 “Yes, man. More than anything. We all hunt in my village. You do not like to hunt?”
 “No,” said Robert Jordan. “I do not like to kill animals.”
 “With me it is the opposite,” the old man said. “I do not like to kill men.”
 “Nobody does except those who are disturbed in the head,” Robert Jordan said. “But I
feel nothing against it when it is necessary. When it is for the cause.”
 “It is a different thing, though,” Anselmo said. “In my house, when I had a house, and
now I have no house, there were the tusks of boar I had shot in the lower forest. There
were the hides of wolves I had shot. In the winter, hunting them in the snow. One very
big one, I killed at dusk in the outskirts of the village on my way home one night in
November. There were four wolf hides on the floor of my house. They were worn by
stepping on them but they were wolf hides. There were the horns of ibex that I had killed
in the high Sierra, and there was an eagle stuffed by an embalmer of birds of Avila, with
his wings spread, and eyes as yellow and real as the eyes of an eagle alive. It was a
very beautiful thing and all of those things gave me great pleasure to contemplate.”
 “Yes,” said Robert Jordan.
 “On the door of the church of my village was nailed the paw of a bear that I killed in
the spring, finding him on a hillside in the snow, overturning a log with this same paw.”
 “When was this?”
 “Six years ago. And every time I saw that paw, like the hand of a man, but with those
long claws, dried and nailed through the palm to the door of the church, I received a
pleasure.”
 “Of pride?”
 “Of pride of remembrance of the encounter with the bear on that hillside in the early
spring. But of the killing of a man, who is a man as we are, there is nothing good that
remains.”
 “You can’t nail his paw to the church,” Robert Jordan said.
 “No. Such a barbarity is unthinkable. Yet the hand of a man is like the paw of a bear.”
 “So is the chest of a man like the chest of a bear,” Robert Jordan said. “With the hide
removed from the bear, there are many similarities in the muscles.”
 “Yes,” Anselmo said. “The gypsies believe the bear to be a brother of man.”
 “So do the Indians in America,” Robert Jordan said. “And when they kill a bear they
apologize to him and ask his pardon. They put his skull in a tree and they ask him to
forgive them before they leave it.”
 “The gypsies believe the bear to be a brother to man because he has the same body
beneath his hide, because he drinks beer, because he enjoys music and because he
likes to dance.”
 “So also believe the Indians.”
 “Are the Indians then gypsies?”
 “No. But they believe alike about the bear.”
 “Clearly. The gypsies also believe he is a brother because he steals for pleasure.”
 “Have you gypsy blood?”
 “No. But I have seen much of them and clearly, since the movement, more. There are
many in the hills. To them it is not a sin to kill outside the tribe. They deny this but it is
true.”
 “Like the Moors.”
 “Yes. But the gypsies have many laws they do not admit to having. In the war many
gypsies have become bad again as they were in olden times.”
 “They do not understand why the war is made. They do not know for what we fight.”
 “No,” Anselmo said. “They only know now there is a war and people may kill again as
in the olden times without a surety of punishment.”
 “You have killed?” Robert Jordan asked in the intimacy of the dark and of their day
together.
“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway 24
 “Yes. Several times. But not with pleasure. To me it is a sin to kill a man. Even
Fascists whom we must kill. To me there is a great difference between the bear and the
man and I do not believe the wizardry of the gypsies about the brotherhood with
animals. No. I am against all killing of men.”
 “Yet you have killed.”
 “Yes. And will again. But if I live later, I will try to live in such a way, doing no harm to
any one, that it will be forgiven.”
 “By whom?”
 “Who knows? Since we do not have God here any more, neither His Son nor the Holy
Ghost, who forgives? I do not know.”
 “You have not God any more?”
 “No. Man. Certainly not. If there were God, never would He have permitted what I
have seen with my eyes. Let them have God.”
 “They claim Him.”
 “Clearly I miss Him, having been brought up in religion. But now a man must be
responsible to himself.”
 “Then it is thyself who will forgive thee for killing.”
 “I believe so,” Anselmo said. “Since you put it clearly in that way I believe that must be
it. But with or without God, I think it is a sin to kill. To take the life of another is to me
very grave. I will do it whenever necessary but I am not of the race of Pablo.”
 “To win a war we must kill our enemies. That has always been true.”
 “Clearly. In war we must kill. But I have very rare ideas,” Anselmo said.
 They were walking now close together in the dark and he spoke softly, sometimes
turning his head as he climbed. “I would not kill even a Bishop. I would not kill a
proprietor of any kind. I would make them work each day as we have worked in the
fields and as we work in the mountains with the timbet all of the rest of their lives. So
they would see what man is born to. That they should sleep where we sleep. That they
should eat as we eat. But above all that they should work. Thus they would learn.”
 “And they would survive to enslave thee again.”
 “To kill them teaches nothing,” Anselmo said. “You cannot exterminate them because
from their seed comes more with greater hatred. Prison is nothing. Prison only makes
hatred. That all our enemies should learn.”
 “But still thou hast killed.”
 “Yes,” Anselmo said. “Many times and will again. But not with pleasure and regarding
it as a sin.”
 “And the sentry. You joked of killing the sentry.”
 “That was in joke. I would kill the sentry. Yes. Certainly and with a clear heart
considering our task. But not with pleasure.”
 “We will leave them to those who enjoy it,” Robert Jordan said. “There are eight and
five. That is thirteen for those who enjoy it.”
 “There are many of those who enjoy it,” Anselmo said in the dark. “We have many of
those. More of those than of men who would serve for a battle.”
 “Hast thou ever been in a battle?”
 “Nay,” the old man said. “We fought in Segovia at the start of the movement but we
were beaten and we ran. I ran with the others. We did not truly understand what we
were doing, nor how it should be done. Also I had only a shotgun with cartridges of large
buckshot and the guardia civil had Mausers. I could not hit them with buckshot at a
hundred yards, and at three hundred yards they shot us as they wished as though we
were rabbits. They shot much and well and we were like sheep before them.” He was
silent. Then asked, “Thinkest thou there will be a battle at the bridge?”
 “There is a chance.”
 “I have never seen a battle without running,” Anselmo said. “I do not know how I would
comport myself. I am an old man and I have wondered.”
 “I will respond for thee,” Robert Jordan told him.
 “And hast thou been in many battles?”
“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway 25
 “Several.”
 “And what thinkest thou of this of the bridge?”
 “First I think of the bridge. That is my business. It is not difficult to destroy the bridge.
Then we will make the dispositions for the rest. For the preliminaries. It will all be
written.”
 “Very few of these people read,” Anselmo said.
 “It will be written for every one’s knowledge so that all know, but also it will be clearly
explained.”
 “I will do that to which I am assigned,” Anselmo said. “But remembering the shooting
in Segovia, if there is to be a battle or even much exchanging of shots, I would wish to
have it very clear what I must do under all circumstances to avoid running. I remember
that I had a great tendency to run at Segovia.”
 “We will be together,” Robert Jordan told him. “I will tell you what there is to do at all
times.”
 “Then there is no problem,” Anselmo said. “I can do anything that I am ordered.”
 “For us will be the bridge and the battle, should there be one,” Robert Jordan said and
saying it in the dark, he felt a little theatrical but it sounded well in Spanish.
 “It should be of the highest interest,” Anselmo said and hearing him say it honestly and
clearly and with no pose, neither the English pose of understatement nor any Latin
bravado, Robert Jordan thought he was very lucky to have this old man and having
seen the bridge and worked out and simplified the problem it would have been to
surprise the posts and blow it in a normal way, he resented Golz’s orders, and the
necessity for them. He resented them for what they could do to him and for what they
could do to this old man. They were bad orders all right for those who would have to
carry them out.
 And that is not the way to think, he told himself, and there is not you, and there are no
people that things must not happen to. Neither you nor this old man is anything. You are
instruments to do your duty. There are necessary orders that are no fault of yours and
there is a bridge and that bridge can be the point on which the future of the human race
can turn. As it can turn on everything that happens in this war. You have only one thing
to do and you must do it. Only one thing, hell, he thought. If it were one thing it was
easy. Stop worrying, you windy bastard, he said to himself. Think about something else.
 So he thought about the girl Maria, with her skin, the hair and the eyes all the same
golden tawny brown, the hair a little darker than the rest but it would be lighter as her
skin tanned deeper, the smooth skin, pale gold on the surface with a darkness
underneath. Smooth it would be, all of her body smooth, and she moved awkwardly as
though there were something of her and about her that embarrassed her as though it
were visible, though it was not, but only in her mind. And she blushed with he looked at
her, and she sitting, her hands clasped around her knees and the shirt open at the
throat, the cup of her breasts uptilted against the shirt, and as he thought of her, his
throat was choky and there was a difficulty in walking and he and Anselmo spoke no
more until the old man said, “Now we go down through these rocks and to the camp.”
 As they came through the rocks in the dark, a man spoke to them, “Halt. Who goes?”
They heard a rifle bolt snick as it was drawn back and then the knock against the wood
as it was pushed forward and down on the stock.
 “Comrades,” Anselmo said.
 “What comrades?”
 “Comrades of Pablo,” the old man told him. “Dost thou not know us?”
 “Yes,” the voice said. “But it is an order. Have you the password?”
 “No. We come from below.”
 “I know,” the man said in the dark. “You come from the bridge. I know all of that. The
order is not mine. You must know the second half of a password.”
 “What is the first half then?” Robert Jordan said.
 “I have forgotten it,” the man said in the dark and laughed. “Go then unprintably to the
campfire with thy obscene dynamite.”
“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway 26
 “That is called guerilla discipline,” Anselmo said. “Uncock thy piece.”
 “It is uncocked,” the man said in the dark. “I let it down with my thumb and forefinger.”
 “Thou wilt do that with a Mauser sometime which has no knurl on the bolt and it will
fire.”
 “This is a Mauser,” the man said. “But I have a grip of thumb and forefinger beyond
description. Always I let it down that way.”
 “Where is the rifle pointed?” asked Anselmo into the dark.
 “At thee,” the man said, “all the time that I descended the bolt. And when thou comest
to the camp, order that some one should relieve me because I have indescribable and
unprintable hunger and I have forgotten the password.”
 “How art thou called?” Robert Jordan asked.
 “Agustín,” the man said. “I am called Agustín and I am dying with boredom in this
spot.”
 “We will take the message,” Robert Jordan said and he thought how the word
aburmiento which means boredom in Spanish was a word no peasant would use in any
other language. Yet it is one of the most common words in the mouth of a Spaniard of
any class.
 “Listen to me,” Agustín said, and coming close he put his hand on Robert Jordan’s
shoulder. Then striking a flint and steel together he held it up and blowing on the end of
the cork, looked at the young man’s face in its glow.
 “You look like the other one,” he said. “But something different. Listen,” he put the
lighter down and stood holding his rifle. “Tell me this. Is it true about the bridge?”
 “What about the bridge?”
 “That we blow up an obscene bridge and then have to obscenely well obscenity
ourselves off out of these mountains?”
 “I know not.”
 “You know not,” Agustín said. “What a barbarity! Whose then is the dynamite?”
 “Mine.”
 “And knowest thou not what it is for? Don’t tell me tales.”
 “I know what it is for and so will you in time,” Robert Jordan said. “But now we go to
the camp.”
 “Go to the unprintable,” Agustín said. “And unprint thyself. But do you want me to tell
you something of service to you?”
 “Yes,” said Robert Jordan. “If it is not unprintable,” naming the principal obscenity that
had larded the conversation. The man, Agustín, spoke so obscenely, coupling an
obscenity to every noun as an adjective, using the same obscenity as a verb, that
Robert Jordan wondered if he could speak a straight sentence. Agustín laughed in the
dark when he heard the word. “It is a way of speaking I have. Maybe it is ugly. Who
knows? Each one speaks according to his manner. Listen to me. The bridge is nothing
to me. As well the bridge as another thing. Also I have a boredom in these mountains.
That we should go if it is needed. These mountains say nothing to me. That we should
leave them. But I would say one thing. Guard well thy explosive.”
 “Thank you,” Robert Jordan said. “From thee?”
 “No,” Agustín said. “From people less unprintably equipped than I.”
 “So?” asked Robert Jordan.
 “You understand Spanish,” Agustín said seriously now. “Care well for thy unprintable
explosive.”
 “Thank you.”
 “No. Don’t thank me. Look after thy stuff.”
 “Has anything happened to it?”
 “No, or I would not waste thy time talking in this fashion.”
 “Thank you all the same. We go now to camp.”
 “Good,” said Agustín, “and that they send some one here who knows the password.”
 “Will we see you at the camp?”
 “Yes, man. And shortly.”
“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway 27
 “Come on,” Robert Jordan said to Anselmo.
 They were walking down the edge of the meadow now and there was a gray mist. The
grass was lush underfoot after the pineneedle floor of the forest and the dew on the
grass wet through their canvas rope-soled shoes. Ahead, through the trees, Robert
Jordan Could see a light where he knew the mouth of the cave must be.
 “Agustín is a very good man,” Anselmo said. “He speaks very filthily and always in
jokes but he is a very serious man.”
 “You know him well?”
 “Yes. For a long time. I have much confidence in him.”
 “And what he says?”
 “Yes, man. This Pablo is bad now, as you could see.”
 “And the best thing to do?”
 “One shall guard it at all times.”
 “Who?”
 “You. Me. The woman and Agustín. Since he sees the danger.”
 “Did you think things were as bad as they are here?”
 “No,” Anselmo said. “They have gone bad very fast. But it was necessary to come
here. This is the country of Pablo and of El Sordo. In their country we must deal with
them unless it is something that can be done alone.”
 “And El Sordo?”
 “Good,” Anselmo said. “As good as the other is bad.”
 “You believe now that he is truly bad?”
 “All afternoon I have thought of it and since we have heard what we have heard, I
think now, yes. Truly.”
 “It would not be better to leave, speaking of another bridge, and obtain men from other
bands?”
 “No,” Anselmo said. “This is his country. You could not move that he would not know
it. But one must move with much precautions.”
4
 They came down to the mouth of the cave, where a light shone out from the edge of a
blanket that hung over the opening. The two packs were at the foot of the tree covered
with a canvas and Robert Jordan knelt down and felt the canvas wet and stiff over them.
In the dark he felt under the canvas in the outside pocket of one of the packs and took
out a leather-covered flask and slipped it in his pocket. Unlocking the long barred
padlocks that passed through the grommet that closed the opening of the mouth of the
packs, and untying the drawstring at the top of each pack, he felt inside them and
verified their contents with his hands. Deep in one pack he felt the bundled blocks in the
sacks, the sacks wrapped in the sleeping robe, and tying the strings of that and pushing
the lock shut again, he put his hands into the other and felt the sharp wood outline of the
box of the old exploder, the cigar box with the caps, each little cylinder wrapped round
and round with its two wires (the lot of them packed as carefully as he had packed his
collection of wild bird eggs when he was a boy), the stock of the submachine gun,
disconnected from the barrel and wrapped in his leather jacket, the two pans and five
clips in one of the inner pockets of the big pack-sack arid the small coils of copper wire
and the big coil of light insulated Wire in the other. In the pocket with the wire he felt his
pliers and the two wooden awls for making holes in the end of the blocks and then, from
the last inside pocket, he took a big box of the Russian cigarettes of the lot he had from
Golz’s headquarters and tying the mouth of the pack shut, he pushed the lock in,
buckled the flaps down and again covered both packs with the canvas. Anselmo had
gone on into the cave.
 Robert Jordan stood up to follow him, then reconsidered and, lifting the canvas off the
two packs, picked them up, one in each hand, and started with them, just able to carry
them, for the mouth of the cave. He laid one pack down and lifted the blanket aside,
“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway 28
then with his head stooped and with a pack in each hand, carrying by the leather
shoulder straps, he went into the cave.
 It was warm and smoky in the cave. There was a table along one wall with a tallow
candle stuck in a bottle on it and at the table were seated Pablo, three men he did not
know, and the gypsy, Rafael. The candle made shadows on the wall behind the men
and Anselmo stood where he had come in to the right of the table. The wife of Pablo
was standing over the charcoal fire on the open fire hearth in the corner of the cave. The
girl knelt by her stirring in an iron pot. She lifted the wooden spoon out and looked at
Robert Jordan as he stood there in the doorway and he saw, in the glow from the fire
the woman was blowing with a bellows, the girl’s face, her arm and the drops running
down from the spoon and dropping into the iron pot.
 “What do you carry?” Pablo said.
 “My things,” Robert Jordan said and set the two packs down a little way apart where
the cave opened out on the side away from the table.
 “Are they not well outside?” Pablo asked.
 “Some one might trip over them in the dark,” Robert Jordan said and walked over to
the table and laid the box of cigarettes on it.
 “I do not like to have dynamite here in the cave,” Pablo said.
 “It is far from the fire,” Robert Jordan said. “Take some cigarettes.” He ran his
thumbnail along the side of the paper box with the big colored figure of a warship on the
cover and pushed the box toward Pablo.
 Anselmo brought him a rawhide-covered stool and he sat down at the table. Pablo
looked at him as though he were going to speak again, then reached for the cigarettes.
 Robert Jordan pushed them toward the others. He was not looking at them yet. But he
noted one man took cigarettes and two did not. All of his concentration was on Pablo.
 “How goes it, gypsy?” he said to Rafael.
 “Good,” the gypsy said. Robert Jordan could tell they had been talking about him
when he came in. Even the gypsy was not at ease.
 “She is going to let you eat again?” Robert Jordan asked the gypsy.
 “Yes. Why not?” the gypsy said. It was a long way from the friendly joking they had
together in the afternoon.
 The woman of Pablo said nothing and went on blowing up the coals of the fire.
 “One called Agustín says he dies of boredom above,” Robert Jordan said.
 “That doesn’t kill,” Pablo said. “Let him die a little.”
 “Is there wine?” Robert Jordan asked the table at large, leaning forward, his hands on
the table.
 “There is little left,” Pablo said sullenly. Robert Jordan decided he had better look at
the other three and try to see where he stood.
 “In that case, let me have a cup of water. Thou,” he called to the girl. “Bring me a cup
of water.”
 The girl looked at the woman, who said nothing, and gave no sign of having heard,
then she went to a kettle containing water and dipped a cup full. She brought it to the
table and put it down before him. Robert Jordan smiled at her. At the same time he
sucked in on his stomach muscles and swung a little to the left on his stool so that his
pistol slipped around on his belt closer to where he wanted it. He reached his hand
down toward his hip pocket and Pablo watched him. He knew they all were watching
him, too, but he watched only Pablo. His hand came up from the hip pocket with the
leather-covered flask and he unscrewed the top and then, lifting the cup, drank half the
water and poured very Slowly from the flask into the cup.
 “It is too strong for thee or I would give thee some,” he said to the girl and smiled at
her again. “There is little left or I would offer some to thee,” he said to Pablo.
 “I do not like anis,” Pablo said.
 The acrid smell had carried across the table and he had picked out the one familiar
component.
 “Good,” said Robert Jordan. “Because there is very little left.”
“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway 29
 “What drink is that?” the gypsy asked.
 “A medicine,” Robert Jordan said. “Do you want to taste it?”
 “What is it for?”
 “For everything,” Robert Jordan said. “It cures everything. If you have anything wrong
this will cure it.”
 “Let me taste it,” the gypsy said.
 Robert Jordan pushed the cup toward him. It was a milky yellow now with the water
and he hoped the gypsy would not take more than a swallow. There was very little of it
left and one cup of it took the place of the evening papers, of all the old evenings in
cafés, of all chestnut trees that would be in bloom now in this month, of the great slow
horses of the outer boulevards, of book shops, of kiosques, and of galleries, of the Parc
Montsouris, of the Stade Buffalo, and of the Butte Chaumont, of the Guaranty Trust
Company and the Ile de la Cite, of Foyot’s old hotel, and of being able to read and relax
in the evening; of all the things he had enjoyed and forgotten and that came back to him
when he tasted that opaque, bitter, tongue-numbing, brain-warming, stomach-warming,
idea-changing liquid alchemy.
 The gypsy made a face and handed the cup back. “It smells of anis but it is bitter as
gall,” he said. “It is better to be sick than have that medicine.”
 “That’s the wormwood,” Robert Jordan told him. “In this, the real absinthe, there is
wormwood. It’s supposed to rot your brain out but I don’t believe it. It only changes the
ideas. You should pour water into it very slowly, a few drops at a time. But I poured it
into the water.”
 “What are you saying?” Pablo said angrily, feeling the mockery.
 “Explaining the medicine,” Robert Jordan told him and grinned. “I bought it in Madrid. It
was the last bottle and it’s lasted me three weeks.” He took a big swallow of it and felt it
coasting over his tongue in delicate anxsthesia. He looked at Pablo and grinned again.
 “How’s business?” he asked.
 Pablo did not answer and Robert Jordan looked carefully at the other three men at the
table. One had a large flat face, flat and brown as a Serrano ham with a nose flattened
and broken, and the long thin Russian cigarette, projecting at an angle, made the face
look even flatter. This man had short gray hair and a gray stubble of beard and wore the
usual black smock buttoned at the neck. He looked down at the table when Robert
Jordan looked at him but his eyes were steady and they did not blink. The other two
were evidently brothers. They looked much alike and were both short, heavily built, dark
haired, their hair growing low on their foreheads, dark-eyed and brown. One had a scar
across his forehead above his left eye and as he looked at them, they looked back at
him steadily. One looked to be about twenty-six or -eight, the other perhaps two years
older.
 “What are you looking at?” one brother, the one with the scar, asked.
 “Thee,” Robert Jordan said.
 “Do you see anything rare?”
 “No,” said Robert Jordan. “Have a cigarette?”
 “Why not?” the brother said. He had not taken any before. “These are like the other
had. He of the train.”
 “Were you at the train?”
 “We were all at the train,” the brother said quietly. “All except the old man.”
 “That is what we should do now,” Pablo said. “Another train.”
 “We can do that,” Robert Jordan said. “After the bridge.”
 He could see that the wife of Pablo had turned now from the fire and was listening.
When he said the word “bridge” every one was quiet.
 “After the bridge,” he said again deliberately and took a sip of the absinthe. I might as
well bring it on, he thought. It’s coming anyWay.
 “I do not go for the bridge,” Pablo said, looking down at the table. “Neither me nor my
people.”
 Robert Jordan said nothing. He looked at Anselmo and raised the cup. “Then we shall
“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway 30
do it alone, old one,” he said and smiled.
 “Without this coward,” Anselmo said.
 “What did you say?” Pablo spoke to the old man.
 “Nothing for thee. I did not speak to thee,” Anselmo told him.
 Robert Jordan now looked past the table to where the wife of Pablo was standing by
the fire. She had said nothing yet, nor given any sign. But now she said something he
could not hear to the girl and the girl rose from the cooking fire, slipped along the wall,
opened the blanket that hung over the mouth of the cave and went out. I think it is going
to come now, Robert Jordan thought. I believe this is it. I did not want it to be this way
but this seems to be the way it is.
 “Then we will do the bridge without thy aid,” Robert Jordan said to Pablo.
 “No,” Pablo said, and Robert Jordan watched his face sweat. “Thou wilt blow no
bridge here.”
 “No?”
 “Thou wilt blow no bridge,” Pablo said heavily.
 “And thou?” Robert Jordan spoke to the wife of Pablo who was standing, still and
huge, by the fire. She turned toward them and said, “I am for the bridge.” Her face was
lit by the fire and it was flushed and it shone warm and dark and handsome now in the
firelight as it was meant to be.
 “What do you say?” Pablo said to her and Robert Jordan saw the betrayed look on his
face and the sweat on his forehead as he turned his head.
 “I am for the bridge and against thee,” the wife of Pablo said. “Nothing more.”
 “I am also for the bridge,” the man with the flat face and the broken nose said,
crushing the end of the cigarette on the table.
 “To me the bridge means nothing,” one of the brothers said. “I am for the mujer of
Pablo.”
 “Equally,” said the other brother.
 “Equally,” the gypsy said.
 Robert Jordan watched Pablo and as he watched, letting his right hand hang lower
and lower, ready if it should be necessary, half hoping it would be (feeling perhaps that
were the simplest and easiest yet not wishing to spoil what had gone so well, knowing
how quickly all of a family, all of a clan, all of a band, can turn against a stranger in a
quarrel, yet thinking what could be done with the hand were the simplest and best and
surgically the most sound now that this had happened), saw also the wife of Pablo
standing there and watched her blush proudly and soundly and healthily as the
allegiances were given.
 “I am for the Republic,” the woman of Pablo said happily. “And the Republic is the
bridge. Afterwards we will have time for other projects.”
 “And thou,” Pablo said bitterly. “With your head of a seed bull and your heart of a
whore. Thou thinkest there will be an afterwards from this bridge? Thou hast an idea of
that which will pass?”
 “That which must pass,” the woman of Pablo said. “That which must pass, will pass.”
 “And it means nothing to thee to be hunted then like a beast after this thing from which
we derive no profit? Nor to die in it?”
 “Nothing,” the woman of Pablo said. “And do not try to frighten me, coward.”
 “Coward,” Pablo said bitterly. “You treat a man as coward because he has a tactical
sense. Because he can see the results of an idiocy in advance. It is not cowardly to
know what is foolish.”
 “Neither is it foolish to know what is cowardly,” said Anselmo, unable to resist making
the phrase.
 “Do you want to die?” Pablo said to him seriously and Robert Jordan saw how
unrhetorical was the question.
 “No.”
 “Then watch thy mouth. You talk too much about things you do not understand. Don’t
you see that this is serious?” he said almost pitifully. “Am I the only one who sees the
“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway 31
seriousness of this?”
 I believe so, Robert Jordan thought. Old Pablo, old boy, I believe so. Except me. You
can see it and I see it and the woman read it in my hand but she doesn’t see it, yet. Not
yet she doesn’t see it.
 “Am I a leader for nothing?” Pablo asked. “I know what I speak of. You others do not
know. This old man talks nonsense. He is an old man who is nothing but a messenger
and a guide for foreigners. This foreigner comes here to do a thing for the good of the
foreigners. For his good we must be sacrificed. I am for the good and the safety of all.”
 “Safety,” the wife of Pablo said. “There is no such thing as safety. There are so many
seeking safety here now that they make a great danger. In seeking safety now you lose
all.”
 She stood now by the table with the big spoon in her hand.
 “There is safety,” Pablo said. “Within the danger there is the safety of knowing what
chances to take. It is like the bullfighter who knowing what he is doing, takes no chances
and is safe.”
 “Until he is gored,” the woman said bitterly. “How many times have I heard matadors
talk like that before they took a goring. How often have I heard Finito say that it is all
knowledge and that the bull never gored the man; rather the man gored himself on the
horn of the bull. Always do they talk that way in their arrogance before a goring.
Afterwards we visit them in the clinic.” Now she was mimicking a visit to a bedside,
“Hello, old timer. Hello,” she boomed. Then, “Buenas, Compadre. How goes it, Pilar?”
imitating the weak voice of the wounded bullfighter. “How did this happen, Finito, Chico,
how did this dirty accident occur to thee?” booming it out in her own voice. Then talking
weak and small, “It is nothing, woman. Pilar, it is nothing. It shouldn’t have happened. I
killed him very well, you understand. Nobody could have killed him better. Then having
killed him exactly as I should and him absolutely dead, swaying on his legs, and ready
to fall of his own weight, I walked away from him with a certain amount of arrogance and
much style and from the back he throws me this horn between the cheeks of my
buttocks and it comes out of my liver.” She commenced to laugh, dropping the imitation
of the almost effeminate bullfighter’s voice and booming again now. “You and your
safety! Did I live nine years with three of the worst paid matadors in the world not to
learn about fear and about safety? Speak to me of anything but safety. And thee. What
illusions I put in thee and how they have turned out! From one year of war thou has
become lazy, a drunkard and a coward.”
 “In that way thou hast no right to speak,” Pablo said. “And less even before the people
and a stranger.”
 “In that way will I speak,” the wife of Pablo went on. “Have you not heard? Do you still
believe that you command here?”
 “Yes,” Pablo said. “Here I command.”
 “Not in joke,” the woman said. “Here I command! Haven’t you heard la gente? Here no
one commands but me. You can stay if you wish and eat of the food and drink of the
wine, but not too bloody much, and share in the work if thee wishes. But here I
command.”
 “I should shoot thee and the foreigner both,” Pablo said suilenly.
 “Try it,” the woman said. “And see what happens.”
 “A cup of water for me,” Robert Jordan said, not taking his eyes from the man with his
sullen heavy head and the woman standing proudly and confidently holding the big
spoon as authoritatively as though it were a baton.
 “Maria,” called the woman of Pablo and when the girl came in the door she said,
“Water for this comrade.”
 Robert Jordan reached for his flask and, bringing the flask out, as he brought it he
loosened the pistol in the holster and swung it on top of his thigh. He poured a second
absinthe into his cup and took the cup of water the girl brought him and commenced to
drip it into the cup, a little at a time. The girl stood at his elbow, watching him.
 “Outside,” the woman of Pablo said to her, gesturing with the spoon.
“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway 32
 “It is cold outside,” the girl said, her cheek close to Robert Jordan’s, watching what
was happening in the cup where the liquor was clouding.
 “Maybe,” the woman of Pablo said. “But in here it is too hot.” Then she said, kindly, “It
is not for long.”
 The girl shook her head and went out.
 I don’t think he is going to take this much more, Robert Jordan thought to himself. He
held the cup in one hand and his other hand rested, frankly now, on the pistol. He had
slipped the safety catch and he felt the worn comfort of the checked grip chafed almost
smooth and touched the round, cool companionship of the trigger guard. Pablo no
longer looked at him but only at the woman. She went on, “Listen to me, drunkard. You
understand who commands here?”
 “I command.”
 “No. Listen. Take the wax from thy hairy ears. Listen well. I command.”
 Pablo looked at her and you could tell nothing of what he was thinking by his face. He
looked at her quite deliberately and then he looked across the table at Robert Jordan.
He looked at him a long time contemplatively and then he looked back at the woman,
again.
 “All right. You command,” he said. “And if you want he can command too. And the two
of you can go to hell.” He was looking the woman straight in the face and he was neither
dominated by her nor seemed to be much affected by her. “It is possible that I am lazy
and that I drink too much. You may consider me a coward but there you are mistaken.
But I am not stupid.” He paused. “That you should command and that you should like it.
Now if you are a woman as well as a commander, that we should have something to
eat.”
 “Maria,” the woman of Pablo called.
 The girl put her head inside the blanket across the cave mouth. “Enter now and serve
the supper.”
 The girl came in and walked across to the low table by the hearth and picked up the
enameled-ware bowls and brought them to the table.
 “There is wine enough for all,” the woman of Pablo said to Robert Jordan. “Pay no
attention to what that drunkard says. When this is finished we will get more. Finish that
rare thing thou art drinking and take a cup of wine.”
 Robert Jordan swallowed down the last of the absinthe, feeling it, gulped that way,
making a warm, small, fume-rising, wet, chemicalchange-producing heat in him and
passed the cup for wine. The girl dipped it full for him and smiled.
 “Well, did you see the bridge?” the gypsy asked. The others, who had not opened their
mouths after the change of allegiance, were all leaning forward to listen now.
 “Yes,” Robert Jordan said. “It is something easy to do. Would you like me to show
you?”
 “Yes, man. With much interest.”
 Robert Jordan took out the notebook from his shirt pocket and showed them the
sketches.
 “Look how it seems,” the flat-faced man, who was named Primitivo, said. “It is the
bridge itself.”
 Robert Jordan with the point of the pencil explained how the bridge should be blown
and the reason for the placing of the charges.
 “What simplicity,” the scarred-faced brother, who was called Andrés, said. “And how
do you explode them?”
 Robert Jordan explained that too and, as he showed them, he felt the girl’s arm resting
on his shoulder as she looked. The woman of Pablo was watching too. Only Pablo took
no interest, sitting by himself with a cup of wine that he replenished by dipping into the
big bowl Maria had filled from the wineskin that hung to the left of the entrance to the
cave.
 “Hast thou done much of this?” the girl asked Robert Jordan softly.
 “Yes.”
“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway 33
 “And can we see the doing of it?”
 “Yes. Why not?”
 “You will see it,” Pablo said from his end of the table. “I believe that you will see it.”
 “Shut up,” the woman of Pablo said to him and suddenly remembering what she had
seen in the hand in the afternoon she was wildly, unreasonably angry. “Shut up, coward.
Shut up, bad luck bird. Shut up, murderer.”
 “Good,” Pablo said. “I shut up. It is thou who commands now and you should continue
to look at the pretty pictures. But remember that I am not stupid.”
 The woman of Pablo could feel her rage changing to sorrow and to a feeling of the
thwarting of all hope and promise. She knew this feeling from when she was a girl and
she knew the things that caused it all through her life. It came now suddenly and she put
it away from her and would not let it touch her, neither her nor the Republic, and she
said, “Now we will eat. Serve the bowls from the pot, Maria.”
5
 Robert Jordan pushed aside the saddle blanket that hung over the mouth of the cave
and, stepping out, took a deep breath of the cold night air. The mist had cleared away
and the stars were out. There was no wind, and, outside now of the warm air of the
cave, heavy with smoke of both tobacco and charcoal, with the odor of cooked rice and
meat, saffron, pimentos, and oil, the tarry, wine-spilled smell of the big skin hung beside
the door, hung by the neck and the four legs extended, wine drawn from a plug fitted in
one leg, wine that spilled a little onto the earth of the floor, settling the dust smell; out
now from the odors of different herbs whose names he did not know that hung in
bunches from the ceiling, with long ropes of garlic, away now from the copper-penny,
red wine and garlic, horse sweat and man sweat dried in the clothing (acrid and gray the
man sweat, sweet and sickly the dried brushed-off lather of horse sweat), of the men at
the table, Robert Jordan breathed deeply of the clear night air of the mountains that
smelled of the pines and of the dew on the grass in the meadow by the stream. Dew
had fallen heavily since the wind had dropped, but, as he stood there, he thought there
would be frost by morning.
 As he stood breathing deep and then listening to the night, he heard first, firing far
away, and then he heard an owl cry in the timber below, where the horse corral was
slung. Then inside the cave he could hear the gypsy starting to sing and the soft
chording of a guitar.
 “I had an inheritance from my father,” the artificially hardened voice rose harshly and
hung there. Then went on:

“It was the moon and the sun
“And though I roam all over the world
“The spending of it’s never done.”

 The guitar thudded with chorded applause for the singer. “Good,” Robert Jordan heard
some one say. “Give us the Catalan, gypsy.”
 “No.”
 “Yes. Yes. The Catalan.”
 “All right,” the gypsy said and sang mournfully,

“My nose is flat.
“My face is black.
“But still I am a man.”

 “Ole!” some one said. “Go on, gypsy!”
 The gypsy’s voice rose tragically and mockingly.
“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway 34

“Thank God I am a Negro.
“And not a Catalan!”

 “There is much noise,” Pablo’s voice said. “Shut up, gypsy.”
 “Yes,” he heard the woman’s voice. “There is too much noise. You could call the
guardia civil with that voice and still it has no quality.”
 “I know another verse,” the gypsy said and the guitar commenced
 “Save it,” the woman told him.
 The guitar stopped.
 “I am not good in voice tonight. So there is no loss,” the gypsy said and pushing the
blanket aside he came out into the dark.
 Robert Jordan watched him walk over to a tree and then come toward him.
 “Roberto,” the gypsy said softly.
 “Yes, Rafael,” he said. He knew the gypsy had been affected by the wine from his
voice. He himself had drunk the two absinthes and some wine but his head was clear
and cold from the strain of the difficulty with Pablo.
 “Why didst thou not kill Pablo?” the gypsy said very softly.
 “Why kill him?”
 “You have to kill him sooner or later. Why did you not approve of the moment?”
 “Do you speak seriously?”
 “What do you think they all waited for? What do you think the woman sent the girl
away for? Do you believe that it is possible to continue after what has been said?”
 “That you all should kill him.”
 “Qué va,” the gypsy said quietly. “That is your business. Three or four times we waited
for you to kill him. Pablo has no friends.”
 “I had the idea,” Robert Jordan said. “But I left it.”
 “Surely all could see that. Every one noted your preparations. Why didn’t you do it?”
 “I thought it might molest you others or the woman.”
 “Qué va. And the woman waiting as a whore waits for the flight of the big bird. Thou
art younger than thou appearest.”
 “It is possible.”
 “Kill him now,” the gypsy urged.
 “That is to assassinate.”
 “Even better,” the gypsy said very softly. “Less danger. Go on. Kill him now.”
 “I cannot in that way. It is repugnant to me and it is not how one should act for the
cause.”
 “Provoke him then,” the gypsy said. “But you have to kill him. There is no remedy.”
 As they spoke, the owl flew between the trees with the softness of all silence, dropping
past them, then rising, the wings beating quickly, but with no noise of feathers moving
as the bird hunted.
 “Look at him,” the gypsy said in the dark. “Thus should men move.”
 “And in the day, blind in a tree with crows around him,” Robert Jordan said.
 “Rarely,” said the gypsy. “And then by hazard. Kill him,” he went on. “Do not let it
become difficult.”
 “Now the moment is passed.”
 “Provoke it,” the gypsy said. “Or take advantage of the quiet.”
 The blanket that closed the cave door opened and light came out. Some one came
toward where they stood.
 “It is a beautiful night,” the man said in a heavy, dull voice. “We will have good
weather.”
 It was Pablo.
 He was smoking one of the Russian cigarettes and in the glow, as he drew on the
cigarette, his round face showed. They could see his heavy, long-armed body in the
starlight.
“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway 35
 “Do not pay any attention to the woman,” he said to Robert Jordan. In the dark the
cigarette glowed bright, then showed in his hand as he lowered it. “She is difficult
sometimes. She is a good woman. Very loyal to the Republic.” The light of the cigarette
jerked slightly now as he spoke. He must be talking with it in the corner of his mouth,
Robert Jordan thought. “We should have no difficulties. We are of accord. I am glad you
have come.” The cigarette glowed brightly. “Pay no attention to arguments,” he said.
“You are very welcome here.
 “Excuse me now,” he said. “I go to see how they have picketed the horses.”
 He went off through the trees to the edge of the meadow and they heard a horse
nicker from below.
 “You see?” the gypsy said. “Now you see? In this way has the moment escaped.”
 Robert Jordan said nothing.
 “I go down there,” the gypsy said angrily.
 “To do what?”
 “Qué va, to do what. At least to prevent him leaving.”
 “Can he leave with a horse from below?”
 “No.”
 “Then go to the spot where you can prevent him.”
 “Agustín is there.”
 “Go then and speak with Agustín. Tell him that which has happened.”
 “Agustín will kill him with pleasure.”
 “Less bad,” Robert Jordan said. “Go then above and tell him all as it happened.”
 “And then?”
 “I go to look below in the meadow.”
 “Good. Man. Good,” he could not see Rafael’s face in the dark but he could feel him
smiling. “Now you have tightened your garters,” the gypsy said approvingly.
 “Go to Agustín,” Robert Jordan said to him.
 “Yes, Roberto, yes,” said the gypsy.
 Robert Jordan walked through the pines, feeling his way from tree to tree to the edge
of the meadow. Looking across it in the darkness, lighter here in the open from the
starlight, he saw the dark bulks of the picketed horses. He counted them where they
were scattered between him and the stream. There were five. Robert Jordan sat down
at the foot of a pine tree and looked out across the meadow.
 I am tired, he thought, and perhaps my judgment is not good. But my obligation is the
bridge and to fulfill that, I must take no useless risk of myself until I complete that duty.
Of course it is sometimes more of a risk not to accept chances which are necessary to
take but I have done this so far, trying to let the situation take its own course. If it is true,
as the gypsy says, that they expected me to kill Pablo then I should have done that. But
it was never clear to me that they did expect that. For a stranger to kill where he must
work with the people afterwards is very bad. It may be done in action, and it may be
done if backed by sufficient discipline, but in this case I think it would be very bad,
although it was a temptation and seemed a short and simple way. But I do not believe
anything is that short nor that simple in this country and, while I trust the woman
absolutely, I could not tell how she would react to such a drastic thing. One dying in
such a place can be very ugly, dirty and repugnant. You could not tell how she would
react. Without the woman there is no organization nor any discipline here and with the
woman it can be very good. It would be ideal if she would kill him, or if the gypsy would
(but he will not) or if the sentry, Agustín, would. Anselmo will if I ask it, though he says
he is against all killing. He hates him, I believe, and he already trusts me and believes in
me as a representative of what he believes in. Only he and the woman really believe in
the Republic as far as I can see; but it is too early to know that yet.
 As his eyes became used to the starlight he could see that Pablo was standing by one
of the horses. The horse lifted his head from grazing; then dropped it impatiently. Pablo
was standing by the horse, leaning against him, moving with him as he swung with the
length of the picket rope and patting him on the neck. The horse was impatient at the
“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway 36
tenderness while he was feeding. Robert Jordan could not see what Pablo was doing,
nor hear what he was saying to the horse, but he could see that he was neither
unpicketing nor saddling. He sat watching him, trying to think his problem out clearly.
 “Thou my big good little pony,” Pablo was saying to the horse in the dark; it was the
big bay stallion he was speaking to. “Thou lovely white-faced big beauty. Thou with the
big neck arching like the viaduct of my pueblo,” he stopped. “But arching more and
much finer.” The horse was snatching grass, swinging his head sideways as he pulled,
annoyed by the man and his talking. “Thou art no woman nor a fool,” Pablo told the bay
horse. “Thou, oh, thou, thee, thee, my big little pony. Thou art no woman like a rock that
is burning. Thou art no colt of a girl with cropped head and the movement of a foal still
wet from its mother. Thou dost not insult nor lie nor not understand. Thou, oh, thee, oh
my good big little pony.”
 It would have been very interesting for Robert Jordan to have heard Pablo speaking to
the bay horse but he did not hear him because now, convinced that Pablo was only
down checking on his horses, and having decided that it was not a practical move to kill
him at this time, he stood up and walked back to the cave. Pablo stayed in the meadow
talking to the horse for a long time. The horse understood nothing that he said; only,
from the tone of the voice, that they were endearments and he had been in the corral all
day and was hungry now, grazing impatiently at the limits of his picket rope, and the
man annoyed him. Pablo shifted the picket pin finally and stood by the horse, not talking
now. The horse went on grazing and was relieved now that the man did not bother him.
6
 Inside the cave, Robert Jordan sat on one of the rawhide stools in a corner by the fire
listening to the woman. She was washing the dishes and the girl, Maria, was drying
them and putting them away, kneeling to place them in the hollow dug in the wall that
was used as a shelf.
 “It is strange,” she said. “That El Sordo has not come. He should have been here an
hour ago.”
 “Did you advise him to come?”
 “No. He comes each night.”
 “Perhaps he is doing something. Some work.”
 “It is possible,” she said. “If he does not come we must go to see him tomorrow.”
 “Yes. Is it far from here?”
 “No. It will be a good trip. I lack exercise.”
 “Can I go?” Maria asked. “May I go too, Pilar?”
 “Yes, beautiful,” the woman said, then turning her big face, “Isn’t she pretty?” she
asked Robert Jordan. “How does she seem to thee? A little thin?”
 “To me she seems very well,” Robert Jordan said. Maria filled his cup with wine. “Drink
that,” she said. “It will make me seem even better. It is necessary to drink much of that
for me to seem beautiful.”
 “Then I had better stop,” Robert Jordan said. “Already thou seemest beautiful and
more.”
 “That’s the way to talk,” the woman said. “You talk like the good ones. What more
does she seem?”
 “Intelligent,” Robert Jordan said lamely. Maria giggled and the woman shook her head
sadly. “How well you begin and how it ends, Don Roberto.”
 “Don’t call me Don Roberto.”
 “It is a joke. Here we say Don Pablo for a joke. As we say the Señorita Maria for a
joke.”
 “I don’t joke that way,” Robert Jordan said. “Camarada to me is what all should be
called with seriousness in this war. In the joking commences a rottenness.”
 “Thou art very religious about thy politics,” the woman teased him. “Thou makest no
jokes?”
“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway 37
 “Yes. I care much for jokes but not in the form of address. It is like a flag.”
 “I could make jokes about a flag. Any flag,” the woman laughed. “To me no one can
joke of anything. The old flag of yellow and gold we called pus and blood. The flag of the
Republic with the purple added we call blood, pus and permanganate. It is a joke.”
 “He is a Communist,” Maria said. “They are very serious gente.”
 “Are you a Communist?”
 “No I am an anti-fascist.”
 “For a long time?”
 “Since I have understood fascism.”
 “How long is that?”
 “For nearly ten years.”
 “That is not much time,” the woman said. “I have been a Republican for twenty years.”
 “My father was a Republican all his life,” Maria said. “It was for that they shot him.”
 “My father was also a Republican all his life. Also my grandfather,” Robert Jordan
said.
 “In what country?”
 “The United States.”
 “Did they shoot them?” the woman asked.
 “Qué va,” Maria said. “The United States is a country of Republicans. They don’t shoot
you for being a Republican there.”
 “All the same it is a good thing to have a grandfather who was a Republican,” the
woman said. “It shows a good blood.”
 “My grandfather was on the Republican national committee,” Robert Jordan said. That
impressed even Maria.
 “And is thy father still active in the Republic?” Pilar asked.
 “No. He is dead.”
 “Can one ask how he died?”
 “He shot himself.”
 “To avoid being tortured?” the woman asked.
 “Yes,” Robert Jordan said. “To avoid being tortured.”
 Maria looked at him with tears in her eyes. “My father,” she said, “could not obtain a
weapon. Oh, I am very glad that your father had the good fortune to obtain a weapon.”
 “Yes. It was pretty lucky,” Robert Jordan said. “Should we talk about something else?”
 “Then you and me we are the same,” Maria said. She put her hand on his arm and
looked in his face. He looked at her brown face and at the eyes that, since he had seen
them, had never been as young as the rest of her face but that now were suddenly
hungry and young and wanting.
 “You could be brother and sister by the look,” the woman said. “But I believe it is
fortunate that you are not.”
 “Now I know why I have felt as I have,” Maria said. “Now it is clear.”
 “Qué va,” Robert Jordan said and reaching over, he ran his hand over the top of her
head. He had been wanting to do that all day and now he did it, he could feel his throat
swelling. She moved her head under his hand and smiled up at him and he felt the thick
but silky roughness of the cropped head rippling between his fingers. Then his hand was
on her neck and then he dropped it.
 “Do it again,” she said. “I wanted you to do that all day.”
 “Later,” Robert Jordan said and his voice was thick.
 “And me,” the woman of Pablo said in her booming voice. “I am expected to watch all
this? I am expected not to be moved? One cannot. For fault of anything better; that
Pablo should come back.”
 Maria took no notice of her now, nor of the others playing cards at the table by the
candlelight.
 “Do you want another cup of wine, Roberto?” she asked.
 “Yes,” he said. “Why not?”
 “You’re going to have a drunkard like I have,” the woman of Pablo said. “With that rare
“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway 38
thing he drank in the cup and all. Listen to me, Inglés.”
 “Not Inglés. American.”
 “Listen, then, American. Where do you plan to sleep?”
 “Outside. I have a sleeping robe.”
 “Good,” she said. “The night is clear?”
 “And will be cold.”
 “Outside then,” she said. “Sleep thee outside. And thy materials can sleep with me.”
 “Good,” said Robert Jordan.
 “Leave us for a moment,” Robert Jordan said to the girl and put his hand on her
shoulder.
 “Why?”
 “I wish to speak to Pilar.”
 “Must I go?”
 “Yes.”
 “What is it?” the woman of Pablo said when the girl had gone over to the mouth of the
cave where she stood by the big wineskin, watching the card players.
 “The gypsy said I should have—” he began.
 “No,” the woman interrupted. “He is mistaken.”
 “If it is necessary that I—” Robert Jordan said quietly but with difficulty.
 “Thee would have done it, I believe,” the woman said. “Nay, it is not necessary. I was
watching thee. But thy judgment was good.”
 “But if it is needful—”
 “No,” the woman said. “I tell you it is not needful. The mind of the gypsy is corrupt.”
 “But in weakness a man can be a great danger.”
 “No. Thou dost not understand. Out of this one has passed all capacity for danger.”
 “I do not understand.”
 “Thou art very young still,” she said. “You will understand.” Then, to the girl, “Come,
Maria. We are not talking more.”
 The girl came over and Robert Jordan reached his hand out and patted her head. She
stroked under his hand like a kitten. Then he thought that she was going to cry. But her
lips drew up again and she looked at him and smiled.
 “Thee would do well to go to bed now,” the woman said to Robert Jordan. “Thou hast
had a long journey.”
 “Good,” said Robert Jordan. “I will get my things.”
7
 He was asleep in the robe and he had been asleep, he thought, for a long time. The
robe was spread on the forest floor in the lee of the rocks beyond the cave mouth and
as he slept, he turned, and turning rolled on his pistol which was fastened by a lanyard
to one wrist and had been by his side under the cover when he went to sleep, shoulder
and back weary, leg-tired, his muscles pulled with tiredness so that the ground was soft,
and simply stretching in the robe against the flannel lining was voluptuous with fatigue.
Waking, he wondered where he was, knew, and then shifted the pistol from under his
side and settled happily to stretch back into sleep, his hand on the pillow of his clothing
that was bundled neatly around his rope-soled shoes. He had one arm around the
pillow.
 Then he felt her hand on his shoulder and turned quickly, his right hand holding the
pistol under the robe.
 “Oh, it is thee,” he said and dropping the pistol he reached both arms up and pulled
her down. With his arms around her he could feel her shivering.
 “Get in,” he said softly. “It is cold out there.”
 “No. I must not.”
 “Get in,” he said. “And we can talk about it later.”
 She was trembling and he held her wrist now with one hand and held her lightly with
“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway 39
the other arm. She had turned her head away.
 “Get in, little rabbit,” he said and kissed her on the back of the neck.
 “I am afraid.”
 “No. Do not be afraid. Get in.”
 “How?”
 “Just slip in. There is much room. Do you want me to help you?”
 “No,” she said and then she was in the robe and he was holding her tight to him and
trying to kiss her lips and she was pressing her face against the pillow of clothing but
holding her arms close around his neck. Then he felt her arms relax and she was
shivering again as he held her.
 “No,” he said and laughed. “Do not be afraid. That is the pistol.”
 He lifted it and slipped it behind him.
 “I am ashamed,” she said, her face away from him.
 “No. You must not be. Here. Now.”
 “No, I must not. I am ashamed and frightened.”
 “No. My rabbit. Please.”
 “I must not. If thou dost not love me.”
 “I love thee.”
 “I love thee. Oh, I love thee. Put thy hand on my head,” she said away from him, her
face still in the pillow. He put his hand on her head and stroked it and then suddenly her
face was away from the pillow and she was in his arms, pressed close against him, and
her face was against his and she was crying.
 He held her still and close, feeling the long length of the young body, and he stroked
her head and kissed the wet saltiness of her eyes, and as she cried he could feel the
rounded, firm-pointed breasts touching through the shirt she wore.
 “I cannot kiss,” she said. “I do not know how.”
 “There is no need to kiss.”
 “Yes. I must kiss. I must do everything.”
 “There is no need to do anything. We are all right. But thou hast many clothes.”
 “What should I do?”
 “I will help you.”
 “Is that better?”
 “Yes. Much. It is not better to thee?”
 “Yes. Much better. And I can go with thee as Pilar said?”
 “Yes.”
 “But not to a home. With thee.”
 “No, to a home.”
 “No. No. No. With thee and I will be thy woman.”
 Now as they lay all that before had been shielded was unshielded. Where there had
been roughness of fabric all was smooth with a smoothness and firm rounded pressing
and a long warm coolness, cool outside and warm within, long and light and closely
holding, closely held, lonely, hollow-making with contours, happymaking, young and
loving and now all warmly smooth with a hollowing, chest-aching, tight-held loneliness
that was such that Robert Jordan felt he could not stand it and he said, “Hast thou loved
others?”
 “Never.”
 Then suddenly, going dead in his arms, “But things were done to me.”
 “By whom?”
 “By various.”
 Now she lay perfectly quietly and as though her body were dead and turned her head
away from him.
 “Now you will not love me.”
 “I love you,” he said.
 But something had happened to him and she knew it.
 “No,” she said and her voice had gone dead and flat. “Thou wilt not love me. But
“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway 40
perhaps thou wilt take me to the home. And I will go to the home and I will never be thy
woman nor anything.”
 “I love thee, Maria.”
 “No. It is not true,” she said. Then as a last thing pitifully and hopefully.
 “But I have never kissed any man.”
 “Then kiss me now.”
 “I wanted to,” she said. “But I know not how. Where things were done to me I fought
until I could not see. I fought until— until—until one sat upon my head—and I bit him—
and then they tied my mouth and held my arms behind my head—and others did things
to me.”
 “I love thee, Maria,” he said. “And no one has done anything to thee. Thee, they
cannot touch. No one has touched thee, little rabbit.”
 “You believe that?”
 “I know it.”
 “And you can love me?” warm again against him now.
 “I can love thee more.”
 “I will try to kiss thee very well.”
 “Kiss me a little.”
 “I do not know how.”
 “Just kiss me.”
 She kissed him on the cheek.
 “No.”
 “Where do the noses go? I always wondered where the noses would go.”
 “Look, turn thy head,” and then their mouths were tight together and she lay close
pressed against him and her mouth opened a little gradually and then, suddenly, holding
her against him, he was happier than he had ever been, lightly, lovingly, exultingly,
innerly happy and unthinking and untired and unworried and only feeling a great delight
and he said, “My little rabbit. My darling. My sweet. My long lovely.”
 “What do you say?” she said as though from a great distance away.
 “My lovely one,” he said.
 They lay there and he felt her heart beating against his and with the side of his foot he
stroked very lightly against the side of hers.
 “Thee came barefooted,” he said.
 “Yes.”
 “Then thee knew thou wert coming to the bed.”
 “Yes.”
 “And you had no fear.”
 “Yes. Much. But more fear of how it would be to take my shoes off.”
 “And what time is it now? lo sabes?”
 “No. Thou hast no watch?”
 “Yes. But it is behind thy back.”
 “Take it from there.”
 “No.”
 “Then look over my shoulder.”
 It was one o’clock. The dial showed bright in the darkness that the robe made.
 “Thy chin scratches my shoulder.”
 “Pardon it. I have no tools to shave.”
 “I like it. Is thy beard blond?”
 “Yes.”
 “And will it be long?”
 “Not before the bridge. Maria, listen. Dost thou—?”
 “Do I what?”
 “Dost thou wish?”
 “Yes. Everything. Please. And if we do everything together, the other maybe never will
have been.”
“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway 41
 “Did you think of that?”
 “No. I think it in myself but Pilar told me.”
 “She is very wise.”
 “And another thing,” Maria said softly. “She said for me to tell you that I am not sick.
She knows about such things and she said to tell you that.”
 “She told you to tell me?”
 “Yes. I spoke to her and told her that I love you. I loved you when I saw you today and
I loved you always but I never saw you before and I told Pilar and she said if I ever told
you anything about anything, to tell you that I was not sick. The other thing she told me
long ago. Soon after the train.”
 “What did she say?”
 “She said that nothing is done to oneself that one does not accept and that if I loved
some one it would take it all away. I wished to die, you see.”
 “What she said is true.”
 “And now I am happy that I did not die. I am so happy that I did not die. And you can
love me?”
 “Yes. I love you now.”
 “And I can be thy woman?”
 “I cannot have a woman doing what I ao. But thou art my woman now.”
 “If once I am, then I will keep on. Am I thy woman now?”
 “Yes, Maria. Yes, my little rabbit.”
 She held herself tight to him and her lips looked for his and then found them and were
against them and he felt her, fresh, new and smooth and young and lovely with the
warm, scalding coolness and unbelievable to be there in the robe that was as familiar as
his clothes, or his shoes, or his duty and then she said, frightenedly, “And now let us do
quickly what it is we do so that the other is all gone.”
 “You want?”
 “Yes,” she said almost fiercely. “Yes. Yes. Yes.”
8
 It was cold in the night and Robert Jordan slept heavily. Once he woke and,
stretching, realized that the girl was there, curled far down in the robe, breathing lightly
and regularly, and in the dark, bringing his head in from the cold, the sky hard and sharp
with stars, the air cold in his nostrils, he put his head under the warmth of the robe and
kissed her smooth shoulder. She did not wake and he rolled onto his side away from her
and with his head out of the robe in the cold again, lay awake a moment feeling the
long, seeping luxury of his fatigue and then the smooth tactile happiness of their two
bodies touching and then, as he pushed his legs out deep as they would go in the robe,
he slipped down steeply into sleep.
 He woke at first daylight and the girl was gone. He knew it as he woke and, putting out
his arm, he felt the robe warm where she had been. He looked at the mouth of the cave
where the blanket showed frost-rimmed and saw the thin gray smoke from the crack in
the rocks that meant the kitchen fire was lighted.
 A man came out of the timber, a blanket worn over his head like a poncho Robert
Jordan saw it was Pablo and that he was smoking a cigarette. He’s been down
corralling the horses, he thought.
 Pablo pulled open the blanket and went into the cave without looking toward Robert
Jordan.
 Robert Jordan felt with his hand the light frost that lay on the worn, spotted green
balloon silk outer covering of the five-year-old down robe, then settled into it again.
Bueno, he said to himself, feeling the familiar caress of the flannel lining as he spread
his legs wide, then drew them together and then turned on his side so that his head
would be away from the direction where he knew the sun would come. Qué más da, I
might as well sleep some more.
“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway 42
 He slept until the sound of airplane motors woke him.
 Lying on his back, he saw them, a fascist patrol of three Fiats, tiny, bright, fast-moving
across the mountain sky, headed in the direction from which Anselmo and he had come
yesterday. The three passed and then came nine more, flying much higher in the
minute, pointed formations of threes, threes and threes.
 Pablo and the gypsy were standing at the cave mouth, in the shadow, watching the
sky and as Robert Jordan lay still, the sky now full of the high hammering roar of motors,
there was a new droning roar and three more planes came over at less than a thousand
feet above the clearing. These three were Heinkel one-elevens, twin-motor bombers.
 Robert Jordan, his head in the shadow of the rocks, knew they would not see him, and
that it did not matter if they did. He knew they could possibly see the horses in the corral
if they were looking for anything in these mountains. If they were not looking for anything
they might still see them but would naturally take them for some of their own cavalry
mounts. Then came a new and louder droning roar and three more Heinkel one-elevens
showed coming steeply, stiffly, lower yet, crossing in rigid formation, their pounding roar
approaching in crescendo to an absolute of noise and then receding as they passed the
clearing.
 Robert Jordan unrolled the bundle of clothing that made his pillow and pulled on his
shirt. It was over his head and he was pulling it down when he heard the next planes
coming and he pulled his trousers on under the robe and lay still as three more of the
Heinkel bimotor bombers came over. Before they were gone over the shoulder of the
mountain, he had buckled on his pistol, rolled the robe and placed it against the rocks
and sat now, close against the rocks, tying his rope-soled shoes when the approaching
droning turned to a greater clattering roar than ever before and nine more Heinkel light
bombers came in echelons; hammering the sky apart as they went over.
 Robert Jordan slipped along the rocks to the mouth of the cave where one of the
brothers, Pablo, the gypsy, Anselmo, Agustín and the woman stood in the mouth looking
out.
 “Have there been planes like this before?” he asked.
 “Never,” said Pablo. “Get in. They will see thee.”
 The sun had not yet hit the mouth of the cave. It was just now shining on the meadow
by the stream and Robert Jordan knew they could not be seen in the dark, early
morning shadow of the trees and the solid shade the rocks made, but he went in the
cave in order not to make them nervous.
 “They are many,” the woman said.
 “And there will be more,” Robert Jordan said.
 “How do you know?” Pablo asked suspiciously.
 “Those, just now, will have pursuit planes with them.”
 Just then they heard them, the higher, whining drone, and as they passed at about
five thousand feet, Robert Jordan counted fifteen Fiats in echelon of echelons like a
wild-goose flight of the V-shaped threes.
 In the cave entrance their faces all looked very sober and Robert Jordan said, “You
have not seen this many planes?”
 “Never,” said Pablo.
 “There are not many at Segovia?”
 “Never has there been, we have seen three usually. Sometimes six of the chasers.
Perhaps three Junkers, the big ones with the three motors, with the chasers with them.
Never have we seen planes like this.”
 It is bad, Robert Jordan thought. This is really bad. Here is a concentration of planes
which means something very bad. I must listen for them to unload. But no, they cannot
have brought up the troops yet for the attack. Certainly not before tonight or tomorrow
night, certainly not yet. Certainly they will not be moving anything at this hour.
 He could still hear the receding drone. He looked at his watch. By now they should be
over the lines, the first ones anyway. He Pushed the knob that set the second hand to
clicking and watched it move around. No, perhaps not yet. By now. Yes. Well over by
“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway 43
now. Two hundred and fifty miles an hour for those one-elevens anyway. Five minutes
would carry them there. By now they’re well beyond the pass with Castile all yellow and
tawny beneath them now in the morning, the yellow crossed by white roads and spotted
with the small villages and the shadows of the Heinkels moving over the land as the
shadows of sharks pass over a sandy floor of the ocean.
 There was no bump, bump, bumping thud of bombs. His watch ticked on.
 They’re going on to Colmenar, to Escorial, or to the flying field at Manzanares el Real,
he thought, with the old castle above the lake with the ducks in the reeds and the fake
airfield just behind the real field with the dummy planes, not quite hidden, their props
turning in the wind. That’s where they must be headed. They can’t know about the
attack, he told himself and something in him said, why can’t they? They’ve known about
all the others.
 “Do you think they saw the horses?” Pablo asked.
 “Those weren’t looking for horses,” Robert Jordan said.
 “But did they see them?”
 “Not unless they were asked to look for them.”
 “Could they see them?”
 “Probably not,” Robert Jordan said. “Unless the sun were on the trees.”
 “It is on them very early,” Pablo said miserably.
 “I think they have other things to think of besides thy horses,” Robert Jordan said.
 It was eight minutes since he had pushed the lever on the stop watch and there was
still no sound of bombing.
 “What do you do with the watch?” the woman asked.
 “I listen where they have gone.”
 “Oh,” she said. At ten minutes he stopped looking at the watch knowing it would be too
far away to hear, now, even allowing a minute for the sound to travel, and said to
Anselmo, “I would speak to thee.”
 Anselmo came out of the cave mouth and they walked a little way from the entrance
and stood beside a pine tree.
 “Qué tal?” Robert Jordan asked him. “How goes it?”
 “All right.”
 “Hast thou eaten?”
 “No. No one has eaten.”
 “Eat then and take something to eat at mid-day. I want you to go to watch the road.
Make a note of everything that passes both up and down the road.”
 “I do not write.”
 “There is no need to,” Robert Jordan took out two leaves from his notebook and with
his knife cut an inch from the end of his pencil. “Take this and make a mark for tanks
thus,” he drew a slanted tank, “and then a mark for each one and when there are four,
cross the four strokes for the fifth.”
 “In this way we count also.”
 “Good. Make another mark, two wheels and a box, for trucks. If they are empty make
a circle. If they are full of troops make a straight mark. Mark for guns. Big ones, thus.
Small ones, thus. Mark for cars. Mark for ambulances. Thus, two wheels and a box with
a cross on it. Mark for troops on foot by companies, like this, see? A little square and
then mark beside it. Mark for cavalry, like this, you see? Like a horse. A box with four
legs. That is a troop of twenty horse. You understand? Each troop a mark.”
 “Yes. It is ingenious.”
 “Now,” he drew two large wheels with circles around them and a short line for a gun
barrel. “These are anti-tanks. They have rubber tires. Mark for them. These are antiaircraft,” two wheels with the gun barrel slanted up. “Mark for them also. Do you
understand? Have you seen such guns?”
 “Yes,” Anselmo said. “Of course. It is clear.”
 “Take the gypsy with you that he will know from what point you will be watching so you
may be relieved. Pick a place that is safe, not too close and from where you can see
“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway 44
well and comfortably. Stay until you are relieved.”
 “I understand.”
 “Good. And that when you come back, I should know everything that moved upon the
road. One paper is for movement up. One is for movement down the road.”
 They walked over toward the cave.
 “Send Rafael to me,” Robert Jordan said and waited by the tree. He watched Anselmo
go into the cave, the blanket falling behind him. The gypsy sauntered out, wiping his
mouth with his hand.
 “Qué tal?” the gypsy said. “Did you divert yourself last night?”
 “I slept.”
 “Less bad,” the gypsy said and grinned. “Have you a cigarette?”
 “Listen,” Robert Jordan said and felt in his pocket for the cigarettes. “I wish you to go
with Anselmo to a place from which he will observe the road. There you will leave him,
noting the place in order that you may guide me to it or guide whoever will relieve him
later. You will then go to where you can observe the saw mill and note if there are any
changes in the post there.”
 “What changes?”
 “How many men are there now?”
 “Eight. The last I knew.”
 “See how many are there now. See at what intervals the guard is relieved at that
bridge.”
 “Intervals?”
 “How many hours the guard stays on and at what time a change is made.”
 “I have no watch.”
 “Take mine.” He unstrapped it.
 “What a watch,” Rafael said admiringly. “Look at what complications. Such a watch
should be able to read and write. Look at what complications of numbers. It’s a watch to
end watches.”
 “Don’t fool with it,” Robert Jordan said. “Can you tell time?”
 “Why not? Twelve o’clock mid-day. Hunger. Twelve o’clock midnight. Sleep. Six
o’clock in the morning, hunger. Six o’clock at night, drunk. With luck. Ten o’clock at
night—”
 “Shut up,” Robert Jordan said. “You don’t need to be a clown. I want you to check on
the guard at the big bridge and the post on the road below in the same manner as the
post and the guard at the saw mill and the small bridge.”
 “It is much work,” the gypsy smiled. “You are sure there is no one you would rather
send than me?”
 “No, Rafael. It is very important. That you should do it very carefully and keeping out
of sight with care.”
 “I believe I will keep out of sight,” the gypsy said. “Why do you tell me to keep out of
sight? You think I want to be shot?”
 “Take things a little seriously,” Robert Jordan said. “This is serious.”
 “Thou askest me to take things seriously? After what thou didst last night? When thou
needest to kill a man and instead did what you did? You were supposed to kill one, not
make one! When we have just seen the sky full of airplanes of a quantity to kill us back
to our grandfathers and forward to all unborn grandsons including all cats, goats and
bedbugs. Airplanes making a noise to curdle the milk in your mother’s breasts as they
pass over darkening the sky and roaring like lions and you ask me to take things
seriously. I take them too seriously already.”
 “All right,” said Robert Jordan and laughed and put his hand on the gypsy’s shoulder.
“Don’t take them too seriously then. Now finish your breakfast and go.”
 “And thou?” the gypsy asked. “What do you do?”
 “I go to see El Sordo.”
 “After those airplanes it is very possible that thou wilt find nobody in the whole
mountains,” the gypsy said. “There must have been many people sweating the big drop
“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway 45
this morning when those passed.”
 “Those have other work than hunting guerillas.”
 “Yes,” the gypsy said. Then shook his head. “But when they care to undertake that
work.”
 “Qué va,” Robert Jordan said. “Those are the best of the German light bombers. They
do not send those after gypsies.”
 “They give me a horror,” Rafael said. “Of such things, yes, I am frightened.”
 “They go to bomb an airfield,” Robert Jordan told him as they went into the cave. “I am
almost sure they go for that.”
 “What do you say?” the woman of Pablo asked. She poured him a bowl of coffee and
handed him a can of condensed milk.
 “There is milk? What luxury!”
 “There is everything,” she said. “And since the planes there is much fear. Where did
you say they went?”
 Robert Jordan dripped some of the thick milk into his coffee from the slit cut in the can,
wiped the can on the rim of the cup, and stirred the coffee until it was light brown.
 “They go to bomb an airfield I believe. They might go to Escorial and Colmenar.
Perhaps a!! three.”
 “That they should go a long way and keep away from here,” Pablo said.
 “And why are they here now?” the woman asked. “What brings them now? Never have
we seen such planes. Nor in such quantity. Do they prepare an attack?”
 “What movement was there on the road last night?” Robert Jordan asked. The girl
Maria was close to him but he did not look at her.
 “You,” the woman said. “Fernando. You were in La Granja last night. What movement
was there?”
 “Nothing,” a short, open-faced man of about thirty-five with a cast in one eye, whom
Robert Jordan had not seen before, answered. “A few camions as usual. Some cars. No
movement of troops while I was there.”
 “You go into La Granja every night?” Robert Jordan asked him.
 “I or another,” Fernando said. “Some one goes.”
 “They go for the news. For tobacco. For small things,” the woman said.
 “We have people there?”
 “Yes. Why not? Those who work the power plant. Some others.”
 “What was the news?”
 “Pues nada. There was nothing. It still goes badly in the north. That is not news. In the
north it has gone badly now since the beginning.”
 “Did you hear anything from Segovia?”
 “No, hombre. I did not ask.”
 “Do you go into Segovia?”
 “Sometimes,” Fernando said. “But there is danger. There are controls where they ask
for your papers.”
 “Do you know the airfield?”
 “No, hombre. I know where it is but I was never close to it. There, there is much asking
for papers.”
 “No one spoke about these planes last night?”
 “In La Gnanja? Nobody. But they will talk about them tonight certainly. They talked
about the broadcast of Quiepo de Llano. Nothing more. Oh, yes. It seems that the
Republic is preparing an offensive.”
 “That what?”
 “That the Republic is preparing an offensive.”
 “Where?”
 “It is not certain. Perhaps here. Perhaps for another pant of the Sierra. Hast thou
heard of it?”
 “They say this in La Granja?”
 “Yes, hombre. I had forgotten it. But there is a!ways much talk of offensives.”
“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway 46
 “Where does this talk come from?”
 “Where? Why from different people. The officers speak in the cafés in Segovia and
Avila and the waiters note it. The rumors come running. Since some time they speak of
an offensive by the Republic in these parts.”
 “By the Republic or by the Fascists?”
 “By the Republic. If it were by the Fascists all would know of it. No, this is an offensive
of quite some size. Some say there are two. One here and the other over the Alto del
Leon near the Escorial. Have you heard aught of this?”
 “What else did you hear?”
 “Nada, hombre. Nothing. Oh, yes. There was some talk that the Republicans would try
to blow up the bridges, if there was to be an offensive. But the bridges are guarded.”
 “Art thou joking?” Robert Jordan said, sipping his coffee.
 “No, hombre,” said Fernando.
 “This one doesn’t joke,” the woman said. “Bad luck that he doesn’t.”
 “Then,” said Robert Jordan. “Thank you for all the news. Did you hear nothing more?”
 “No. They talk, as always, of troops to be sent to clear out these mountains. There is
some talk that they are on the way. That they Rave been sent already from Valladolid.
But they always talk in that Way. It is not to give any importance to.”
 “And thou,” the woman of Pablo said to Pablo almost viciously. “With thy talk of
safety.”
 Pablo looked at her reflectively and scratched his chin. “Thou,” he said. “And thy
bridges.”
 “What bridges?” asked Fernando cheerfully.
 “Stupid,” the woman said to him. “Thick head. Tonto. Take another cup of coffee and
try to remember more news.”
 “Don’t be angry, Pilar,” Fernando said calmly and cheerfully. “Neither should one
become alarmed at rumors. I have told thee and this comrade all that I remember.”
 “You don’t remember anything more?” Robert Jordan asked.
 “No,” Fernando said with dignity. “And I am fortunate to remember this because, since
it was but rumors, I paid no attention to any of it.”
 “Then there may have been more?”
 “Yes. It is possible. But I paid no attention. For a year I have heard nothing but
rumors.”
 Robert Jordan heard a quick, control-breaking sniff of laughter from the girl, Maria,
who was standing behind him.
 “Tell us one more rumor, Fernandito,” she said and then her shoulders shook again.
 “If I could remember, I would not,” Fernando said. “It is beneath a man’s dignity to
listen and give importance to rumors.”
 “And with this we will save the Republic,” the woman said.
 “No. You will save it by blowing bridges,” Pablo told her.
 “Go,” said Robert Jordan to Anselmo and Rafael. “If you have eaten.”
 “We go now,” the old man said and the two of them stood up. Robert Jordan felt a
hand on his shoulder. It was Maria. “Thou shouldst eat,” she said and let her hand rest
there. “Eat well so that thy stomach can support more rumors.”
 “The rumors have taken the place of the appetite.”
 “No. It should not be so. Eat this now before more rumors come.” She put the bowl
before him.
 “Do not make a joke of me,” Fernando said to her. “I am thy good friend, Maria.”
 “I do not joke at thee, Fernando. I only joke with him and he should eat or he will be
hungry.”
 “We should all eat,” Fernando said. “Pilar, what passes that we are not served?”
 “Nothing, man,” the woman of Pablo said and filled his bowl with the meat stew. “Eat.
Yes, that’s what you can do. Eat now.”
 “It is very good, Pilar,” Fernando said, all dignity intact.
 “Thank you,” said the woman. “Thank you and thank you again.”
“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway 47
 “Are you angry at me?” Fernando asked.
 “No. Eat. Go ahead and eat.”
 “I will,” said Fernando. “Thank you.”
 Robert Jordan looked at Maria and her shoulders started shaking again and she
looked away. Fernando ate steadily, a proud and dignified expression on his face, the
dignity of which could not be affected even by the huge spoon that he was using or the
slight dripping of juice from the stew which ran from the corners of his mouth.
 “Do you like the food?” the woman of Pablo asked him.
 “Yes, Pilar,” he said with his mouth full. “It is the same as usual.”
 Robert Jordan felt Maria’s hand on his arm and felt her fingers tighten with delight.
 “It is for that that you like it?” the woman asked Fernando.
 “Yes,” she said. “I see. The stew; as usual. Como siempre. Things are bad in the
north; as usual. An offensive here; as usual. That troops come to hunt us out; as usual.
You could serve as a monument to as usual.”
 “But the last two are only rumors, Pilar.”
 “Spain,” the woman of Pablo said bitterly. Then turned to Robert Jordan. “Do they
have people such as this in other countries?”
 “There are no other countries like Spain,” Robert Jordan said politely.
 “You are right,” Fernando said. “There is no other country in the world like Spain.”
 “Hast thou ever seen any other country?” the woman asked him.
 “Nay,” said Fernando. “Nor do I wish to.”
 “You see?” the woman of Pablo said to Robert Jordan.
 “Fernandito,” Maria said to him. “Tell us of the time thee went to Valencia”
 “I did not like Valencia.”
 “Why?” Maria asked and pressed Robert Jordan’s arm again. “Why did thee not like
it?”
 “The people had no manners and I could not understand them. All they did was shout
ché at one another.”
 “Could they understand thee?” Maria asked.
 “They pretended not to,” Fernando said.
 “And what did thee there?”
 “I left without even seeing the sea,” Fernando said. “I did not like the people.”
 “Oh, get out of here, you old maid,” the woman of Pablo said. “Get out of here before
you make me sick. In Valencia I had the best time of my life. Vamos! Valencia. Don’t talk
to me of Valencia.”
 “What did thee there?” Maria asked. The woman of Pablo sat down at the table with a
bowl of coffee, a piece of bread and a bowl of the stew.
 “Qué? what did we there. I was there when Finito had a contract for three fights at the
Feria. Never have I seen so many people. Never have I seen cafés so crowded. For
hours it would be impossible to get a seat and it was impossible to board the tram cars.
In Valencia there was movement all day and all night.”
 “But what did you do?” Maria asked.
 “All things,” the woman said. “We went to the beach and lay in the water and boats
with sails were hauled up out of the sea by oxen. The oxen driven to the water until they
must swim; then harnessed to the boats, and, when they found their feet, staggering up
the sand. Ten yokes of oxen dragging a boat with sails out of the sea in the morning
with the line of the small waves breaking on the beach. That is Valencia.”
 “But what did thee besides watch oxen?”
 “We ate in pavilions on the sand. Pastries made of cooked and shredded fish and red
and green peppers and small nuts like grains of rice. Pastries delicate and flaky and the
fish of a richness that was incredible. Prawns fresh from the sea sprinkled with lime
juice. They were pink and sweet and there were four bites to a prawn. Of those we ate
many. Then we ate paella with fresh sea food, clams in their shells, mussels, crayfish,
and small eels. Then we ate even smaller eels alone cooked in oil and as tiny as bean
sprouts and curled in all directions and so tender they disappeared in the mouth without
“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway 48
chewing. All the time drinking a white wine, cold, light and good at thirty centimos the
bottle. And for an end, melon. That is the home of the melon.”
 “The melon of Castile is better,” Fernando said.
 “Qué va,” said the woman of Pablo. “The melon of Castile is for self abuse. The melon
of Valencia for eating. When I think of those melons long as one’s arm, green like the
sea and crisp and juicy to cut and sweeter than the early morning in summer. Aye, when
I think of those smallest eels, tiny, delicate and in mounds on the plate. Also the beer in
pitchers all through the afternoon, the beer sweating in its coldness in pitchers the size
of water jugs.”
 “And what did thee when not eating nor drinking?”
 “We made love in the room with the strip wood blinds hanging over the balcony and a
breeze through the opening of the top of the door which turned on hinges. We made
love there, the room dark in the day time from the hanging blinds, and from the streets
there was the scent of the flower market and the smell of burned powder from the
firecrackers of the traca that ran though the streets exploding each noon during the
Feria. It was a line of fireworks that ran through all the city, the firecrackers linked
together and the explosions running along on poles and wires of the tramways,
exploding with great noise and a jumping from pole to pole with a sharpness and a
cracking of explosion you could not believe.
 “We made love and then sent for another pitcher of beer with the drops of its coldness
on the glass and when the girl brought it, I took it from the door and I placed the
coldness of the pitcher against the back of Finito as he lay, now, asleep, not having
wakened when the beer was brought, and he said, ‘No, Pilar. No, woman, let me sleep.’
And I said, ‘No, wake up and drink this to see how cold,’ and he drank without opening
his eyes and went to sleep again and I lay with my back against a pillow at the foot of
the bed and watched him sleep, brown and dark-haired and young and quiet in his
sleep, and drank the whole pitcher, listening now to the music of a band that was
passing. You,” she said to Pablo. “Do you know aught of such things?”
 “We have done things together,” Pablo said.
 “Yes,” the woman said. “Why not? And thou wert more man than Finito in your time.
But never did we go to Valencia. Never did we lie in bed together and hear a band pass
in Valencia.”
 “It was impossible,” Pablo told her. “We have had no opportunity to go to Valencia.
Thou knowest that if thou wilt be reasonable. But, with Finito, neither did thee blow up
any train.”
 “No,” said the woman. “That is what is left to us. The train. Yes. Always the train. No
one can speak against that. That remains of all the laziness, sloth and failure. That
remains of the cowardice of this moment. There were many other things before too. I do
not want to be unjust. But no one can speak against Valencia either. You hear me?”
 “I did not like it,” Fernando said quietly. “I did not like Valencia.”
 “Yet they speak of the mule as stubborn,” the woman said. “Clean up, Maria, that we
may go.”
 As she said this they heard the first sound of the planes returning.
9
 They stood in the mouth of the cave and watched them. The bombers were high now
in fast, ugly arrow-heads beating the sky apart with the noise of their motors. They are
shaped like sharks, Robert Jordan thought, the wide-finned, sharp-nosed sharks of the
Gulf Stream. But these, wide-finned in silver, roaring, the light mist of their propellers in
the sun, these do not move like sharks. They move like no thing there has ever been.
They move like mechanized doom.
 You ought to write, he told himself. Maybe you will again some time. He felt Maria
holding to his arm. She was looking up and he said to her, “What do they look like to
you, guapa?”
“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway 49
 “I don’t know,” she said. “Death, I think.”
 “They look like planes to me,” the woman of Pablo said. “‘Where are the little ones?”
 “They may be crossing at another part,” Robert Jordan said. “Those bombers are too
fast to have to wait for them and have come back alone. We never follow them across
the lines to fight. There aren’t enough planes to risk it.”
 Just then three Heinkel fighters in V formation came low over the clearing coming
toward them, just over the tree tops, like clattering, wing-tilting, pinch-nosed ugly toys, to
enlarge suddenly, fearfully to their actual size; pouring past in a whining roar. They were
so low that from the cave mouth all of them could see the pilots, helmeted, goggled, a
scarf blowing back from behind the patrol leader’s head.
 “Those can see the horses,” Pablo said.
 “Those can see thy cigarette butts,” the woman said. “Let fall the blanket.”
 No more planes came over. The others must have crossed farther up the range and
when the droning was gone they went out of the cave into the open.
 The sky was empty now and high and blue and clear.
 “It seems as though they were a dream that you wake from,” Maria said to Robert
Jordan. There was not even the last almost unheard hum that comes like a finger faintly
touching and leaving and touching again after the sound is gone almost past hearing.
 “They are no dream and you go in and clean up,” Pilar said to her. “What about it?”
she turned to Robert Jordan. “Should we ride or walk?”
 Pablo looked at her and grunted.
 “As you will,” Robert Jordan said.
 “Then let us walk,” she said. “I would like it for the liver.”
 “Riding is good for the liver.”
 “Yes, but hard on the buttocks. We will walk and thou—” She turned to Pablo. “Go
down and count thy beasts and see they have not flown away with any.”
 “Do you want a horse to ride?” Pablo asked Robert Jordan.
 “No. Many thanks. What about the girl?”
 “Better for her to walk,” Pilar said. “She’ll get stiff in too many places and serve for
nothing.”
 Robert Jordan felt his face reddening.
 “Did you sleep well?” Pilar asked. Then said, “It is true that there is no sickness. There
could have been. I know not why there wasn’t. There probably still is God after all,
although we have abolished Him. Go on,” she said to Pablo. “This does not concern
thee. This is of people younger than thee. Made of other material. Get on.” Then to
Robert Jordan, “Agustín is looking after thy things. We go when he comes.”
 It was a clear, bright day and warm now in the sun. Robert Jordan looked at the big,
brown-faced woman with her kind, widely set eyes and her square, heavy face, lined
and pleasantly ugly, the eyes merry, but the face sad until the lips moved. He looked at
her and then at the man, heavy and stolid, moving off through the trees toward the
corral. The woman, too, was looking after him.
 “Did you make love?” the woman said.
 “What did she say?”
 “She would not tell me.”
 “I neither.”
 “Then you made love,” the woman said. “Be as careful with her as you can.”
 “What if she has a baby?”
 “That will do no harm,” the woman said. “That will do less harm.”
 “This is no place for that.”
 “She will not stay here. She will go with you.”
 “And where will I go? I can’t take a woman where I go.”
 “Who knows? You may take two where you go.”
 “That is no way to talk.”
 “Listen,” the woman said. “I am no coward, but I see things very clearly in the early
morning and I think there are many that we know that are alive now who will never see
“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway 50
another Sunday.”
 “In what day are we?”
 “Sunday.”
 “Qué va,” said Robert Jordan. “Another Sunday is very far. If we see Wednesday we
are all right. But I do not like to hear thee talk like this.”
 “Every one needs to talk to some one,” the woman said. “Before we had religion and
other nonsense. Now for every one there should be some one to whom one can speak
frankly, for all the valor that one could have one becomes very alone.”
 “We are not alone. We are all together.”
 “The sight of those machines does things to one,” the woman said. “We are nothing
against such machines.”
 “Yet we can beat them.”
 “Look,” the woman said. “I confess a sadness to you, but do not think I lack resolution.
Nothing has happened to my resolution.”
 “The sadness will dissipate as the sun rises. It is like a mist.”
 “Clearly,” the woman said. “If you want it that way. Perhaps it came from talking that
foolishness about Valencia. And that failure of a man who has gone to look at his
horses. I wounded him much with the story. Kill him, yes. Curse him, yes. But wound
him, no.”
 “How came you to be with him?”
 “How is one with any one? In the first days of the movement and before too, he was
something. Something serious. But now he is finished. The plug has been drawn and
the wine has all run out of the skin.”
 “I do not like him.”
 “Nor does he like you, and with reason. Last night I slept with him.” She smiled now
and shook her head. “ Vamos a ver,” she said. “I said to him, ‘Pablo, why did you not kill
the foreigner?’
 “‘He’s a good boy, Pilar,’ he said. ‘He’s a good boy.’
 “So I said, ‘You understand now that I command?’
 “‘Yes, Pilar. Yes,’ he said. Later in the night I hear him awake and he is crying. He is
crying in a short and ugly manner as a man cries when it is as though there is an animal
inside that is shaking him.
 “‘What passes with thee, Pablo?’ I said to him and I took hold of him and held him.
 “‘Nothing, Pilar. Nothing.’
 “‘Yes. Something passes with thee.’
 “‘The people,’ he said. ‘The way they left me. The gente.’
 “‘Yes, but they are with me,’ I said, ‘and I am thy woman.’
 “‘Pilar,’ he said, ‘remember the train.’ Then he said, ‘May God aid thee, Pilar.’
 “‘What are you talking of God for?’ I said to him. ‘What way is that to speak?’
 “‘Yes,’ he said. ‘God and the Virgen.’
 “‘Qué va, God and the Virgen,’ I said to him. ‘Is that any way to talk?’
 “‘I am afraid to die, Pilar,’ he said. ‘Tengo miedo de morir. Dost thou understand?’
 “‘Then get out of bed,’ I said to him. ‘There is not room in one bed for me and thee and
thy fear all together.’
 “Then he was ashamed and was quiet and I went to sleep but, man, he’s a ruin.”
 Robert Jordan said nothing.
 “All my life I have had this sadness at intervals,” the woman said. “But it is not like the
sadness of Pablo. It does not affect my resolution.”
 “I believe that.”
 “It may be it is like the times of a woman,” she said. “It may be it is nothing,” she
paused, then went on. “I put great illusion in the Republic. I believe firmly in the Republic
and I have faith. I believe in it with fervor as those who have religious faith believe in the
mysteries.”
 “I believe you.”
 “And you have this same faith?”
“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway 51
 “In the Republic?”
 “Yes.”
 “Yes,” he said, hoping it was true.
 “I am happy,” the woman said. “And you have no fear?”
 “Not to die,” he said truly.
 “But other fears?”
 “Only of not doing my duty as I should.”
 “Not of capture, as the other had?”
 “No,” he said truly. “Fearing that, one would be so preoccupied as to be useless.”
 “You are a very cold boy.”
 “No,” he said. “I do not think so.”
 “No. In the head you are very cold.”
 “It is that I am very preoccupied with my work.”
 “But you do not like the things of life?”
 “Yes. Very much. But not to interfere with my work.”
 “You like to drink, I know. I have seen.”
 “Yes. Very much. But not to interfere with my work.”
 “And women?”
 “I like them very much, but I have not given them much importance.”
 “You do not care for them?”
 “Yes. But I have not found one that moved me as they say they should move you.”
 “I think you lie.”
 “Maybe a little.”
 “But you care for Maria.”
 “Yes. Suddenly and very much.”
 “I, too. I care for her very much. Yes. Much.”
 “I, too,” said Robert Jordan, and could feel his voice thickening. “I, too. Yes.” It gave
him pleasure to say it and he said it quite formally in Spanish. “I care for her very much.”
 “I will leave you alone with her after we have seen El Sordo.”
 Robert Jordan said nothing. Then he said, “That is not necessary.”
 “Yes, man. It is necessary. There is not much time.”
 “Did you see that in the hand?” he asked.
 “No. Do not remember that nonsense of the hand.”
 She had put that away with all the other things that might do ill to the Republic.
 Robert Jordan said nothing. He was looking at Maria putting away the dishes inside
the cave. She wiped her hands and turned and smiled at him. She could not hear what
Pilar was saying, but as she smiled at Robert Jordan she blushed dark under the tawny
skin and then smiled at him again.
 “There is the day also,” the woman said. “You have the night, but there is the day, too.
Clearly, there is no such luxury as in Valencia in my time. But you could pick a few wild
strawberries or something.” She laughed.
 Robert Jordan put his arm on her big shoulder. “I care for thee, too,” he said. “I care
for thee very much.”
 “Thou art a regular Don Juan Tenorio,” the woman said, embarrassed now with
affection. “There is a commencement of caring for every one. Here comes Agustín.”
 Robert Jordan went into the cave and up to where Maria was standing. She watched
him come toward her, her eyes bright, the blush again on her cheeks and throat.
 “Hello, little rabbit,” he said and kissed her on the mouth. She held him tight to her and
looked in his face and said, “Hello. Oh, hello. Hello.”
 Fernando, still sitting at the table smoking a cigarette, stood up, shook his head and
walked out, picking up his carbine from where it leaned against the wall.
 “It is very unformal,” he said to Pilar. “And I do not like it. You should take care of the
girl.”
 “I am,” said Pilar. “That comrade is her novio.”
 “Oh,” said Fernando. “In that case, since they are engaged, I encounter it to be
“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway 52
perfectly normal.”
 “I am pleased,” the woman said.
 “Equally,” Fernando agreed gravely. “Salud, Pilar.”
 “Where are you going?”
 “To the upper post to relieve Primitivo.”
 “Where the hell are you going?” Agustín asked the grave little man as he came up.
 “To my duty,” Fernando said with dignity.
 “Thy duty,” said Agustín mockingly. “I besmirch the milk of thy duty.” Then turning to
the woman, “Where the un-nameable is this vileness that I am to guard?”
 “In the cave,” Pilar said. “In two sacks. And I am tired of thy obscenity.”
 “I obscenity in the milk of thy tiredness,” Agustín said.
 “Then go and befoul thyself,” Pilar said to him without heat.
 “Thy mother,” Agustín replied.
 “Thou never had one,” Pilar told him, the insults having reached the ultimate formalism
in Spanish in which the acts are never stated but only implied.
 “What are they doing in there?” Agustín now asked confidentially.
 “Nothing,” Pilar told him. “Nada. We are, after all, in the spring, animal.”
 “Animal,” said Agustín, relishing the word. “Animal. And thou. Daughter of the great
whore of whores. I befoul myself in the milk of the springtime.”
 Pilar slapped him on the shoulder.
 “You,” she said, and laughed that booming laugh. “You lack variety in your cursing.
But you have force. Did you see the planes?”
 “I un-name in the milk of their motors,” Agustín said, nodding his head and biting his
lower lip.
 “That’s something,” Pilar said. “That is really something. But really difficult of
execution.”
 “At that altitude, yes,” Agustín grinned. “Desde luego. But it is better to joke.”
 “Yes,” the woman of Pablo said. “It is much better to joke, and you are a good man
and you joke with force.”
 “Listen, Pilar,” Agustín said seriously. “Something is preparing. It is not true?”
 “How does it seem to you?”
 “Of a foulness that cannot be worse. Those were many planes, woman. Many planes.”
 “And thou hast caught fear from them like all the others?”
 “Qué va,” said Agustín. “What do you think they are preparing?”
 “Look,” Pilar said. “From this boy coming for the bridges obviously the Republic is
preparing an offensive. From these planes obviously the Fascists are preparing to meet
it. But why show the planes?”
 “In this war are many foolish things,” Agustín said. “In this war there is an idiocy
without bounds.”
 “Clearly,” said Pilar. “Otherwise we could not be here.”
 “Yes,” said Agustín. “We swim within the idiocy for a year now. But Pablo is a man of
much understanding. Pablo is very wily.”
 “Why do you say this?”
 “I say it.”
 “But you must understand,” Pilar explained. “It is now too late to be saved by wiliness
and he has lost the other.”
 “I understand,” said Agustín. “I know we must go. And since we must win to survive
ultimately, it is necessary that the bridges must be blown. But Pablo, for the coward that
he now is, is very smart.”
 “I, too, am smart.”
 “No, Pilar,” Agustín said. “You are not smart. You are brave. You are loyal. You have
decision. You have intuition. Much decision and much heart. But you are not smart.”
 “You believe that?” the woman asked thoughtfully.
 “Yes, Pilar.”
 “The boy is smart,” the woman said. “Smart and cold. Very cold in the head.”
“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway 53
 “Yes,” Agustín said. “He must know his business or they would not have him doing
this. But I do not know that he is smart. Pablo I know is smart.”
 “But rendered useless by his fear and his disinclination to action.”
 “But still smart.”
 “And what do you say?”
 “Nothing. I try to consider it intelligently. In this moment we need to act with
intelligence. After the bridge we must leave at once. All must be prepared. We must
know for where we are leaving and how.”
 “Naturally.”
 “For this—Pablo. It must be done smartly.”
 “I have no confidence in Pablo.”
 “In this, yes.”
 “No. You do not know how far he is ruined.”
 “Pero es muy vivo. He is very smart. And if we do not do this smartly we are
obscenitied.”
 “I will think about it,” Pilar said. “I have the day to think about it.”
 “For the bridges; the boy,” Agustín said. “This he must know. Look at the fine manner
in which the other organized the train.”
 “Yes,” Pilar said. “It was really he who planned all.”
 “You for energy and resolution,” Agustín said. “But Pablo for the moving. Pablo for the
retreat. Force him now to study it.”
 “You are a man of intelligence.”
 “Intelligent, yes,” Agustín said. “But sin picardia. Pablo for that.”
 “With his fear and all?”
 “With his fear and all.”
 “And what do you think of the bridges?”
 “It is necessary. That I know. Two things we must do. We must leave here and we
must win. The bridges are necessary if we are to Win.”
 “If Pablo is so smart, why does he not see that?”
 “He wants things as they are for his own weakness. He wants tO stay in the eddy of
his own weakness. But the river is rising. Forced to a change, he will be smart in the
change. Es muy vivo.”
 “It is good that the boy did not kill him.”
 “Qué va. The gypsy wanted me to kill him last night. The gypsy is an animal.”
 “You’re an animal, too,” she said. “But intelligent.”
 “We are both intelligent,” Agustín said. “But the talent is Pablo!”
 “But difficult to put up with. You do not know how ruined.”
 “Yes. But a talent. Look, Pilar. To make war all you need is intelligence. But to win you
need talent and material.”
 “I will think it over,” she said. “We must start now. We are late.” Then, raising her
voice, “English!” she called. “Inglés! Come on! Let us go.”
10
 “Let us rest,” Pilar said to Robert Jordan. “Sit down here, Maria, and let us rest.”
 “We should continue,” Robert Jordan said. “Rest when we get there. I must see this
man.”
 “You will see him,” the woman told him. “There is no hurry. Sit down here, Maria.”
 “Come on,” Robert Jordan said. “Rest at the top.”
 “I rest now,” the woman said, and sat down by the stream. The girl sat by her in the
heather, the sun shining on her hair. Only Robert Jordan stood looking across the high
mountain meadow with the trout brook running through it. There was heather growing
where he stood. There were gray boulders rising from the yellow bracken that replaced
the heather in the lower part of the meadow and below was the dark line of the pines.
 “How far is it to El Sordo’s?” he asked.
“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway 54
 “Not far,” the woman said. “It is across this open country, down into the next valley and
above the timber at the head of the stream. Sit thee down and forget thy seriousness.”
 “I want to see him and get it over with.”
 “I want to bathe my feet,” the woman said and, taking off her rope-soled shoes and
pulling off a heavy wool stocking, she put her right foot into the stream. “My God, it’s
cold.”
 “We should have taken horses,” Robert Jordan told her.
 “This is good for me,” the woman said. “This is what I have been missing. What’s the
matter with you?”
 “Nothing, except that I am in a hurry.”
 “Then calm yourself. There is much time. What a day it is and how I am contented not
to be in pine trees. You cannot imagine how one can tire of pine trees. Aren’t you tired
of the pines, guapa?”
 “I like them,” the girl said.
 “What can you like about them?”
 “I like the odor and the feel of the needles under foot. I like the wind in the high trees
and the creaking they make against each other.”
 “You like anything,” Pilar said. “You are a gift to any man if you could cook a little
better. But the pine tree makes a forest of boredom. Thou hast never known a forest of
beech, nor of oak, nor of chestnut. Those are forests. In such forests each tree differs
and there is character and beauty. A forest of pine trees is boredom. What do you say,
Inglés?”
 “I like the pines, too.”
 “Pero, venga,” Pilar said. “Two of you. So do I like the pines, but we have been too
long in these pines. Also I am tired of the mountains. In mountains there are only two
directions. Down and up and down leads only to the road and the towns of the Fascists.”
 “Do you ever go to Segovia?”
 “Qué va. With this face? This is a face that is known. How would you like to be ugly,
beautiful one?” she said to Maria.
 “Thou art not ugly.”
 “Vamos, I’m not ugly. I was born ugly. All my life I have been ugly. You, Inglés, who
know nothing about women. Do you know how an ugly woman feels? Do you know what
it is to be ugly all your life and inside to feel that you are beautiful? It is very rare,” she
put the other foot in the stream, then removed it. “God, it’s cold. Look at the water
wagtail,” she said and pointed to the gray ball of a bird that was bobbing up and down
on a stone up the stream. “Those are no good for anything. Neither to sing nor to eat.
Only to jerk their tails up and down. Give me a cigarette, Inglés,” she said and taking it,
lit it from a flint and steel lighter in the pocket of her skirt. She puffed on the cigarette
and looked at Maria and Robert Jordan.
 “Life is very curious,” she said, and blew smoke from her nostrils. “I would have made
a good man, but I am all woman and all ugly. Yet many men have loved me and I have
loved many men. It is curious. Listen, Inglés, this is interesting. Look at me, as ugly as I
am. Look closely, Inglés.”
 “Thou art not ugly.”
 “Qué no? Don’t lie to me. Or,” she laughed the deep laugh. “Has it begun to work with
thee? No. That is a joke. No. Look at the ugliness. Yet one has a feeling within one that
blinds a man while he loves you. You, with that feeling, blind him, and blind yourself.
Then one day, for no reason, he sees you ugly as you really are and he is not blind any
more and then you see yourself as ugly as he sees you and you lose your man and your
feeling. Do you understand, guapa?” She patted the girl on the shoulder.
 “No,” said Maria. “Because thou art not ugly.”
 “Try to use thy head and not thy heart, and listen,” Pilar said. “I am telling you things of
much interest. Does it not interest you, Inglés?”
 “Yes. But we should go.”
 “Qué va, go. I am very well here. Then,” she went on, addressing herself to Robert
“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway 55
Jordan now as though she were speaking to a classroom; almost as though she were
lecturing. “After a while, when you are as ugly as I am, as ugly as women can be, then,
as I say, after a while the feeling, the idiotic feeling that you are beautiful, grows slowly
in one again. It grows like a cabbage. And then, when the feeling is grown, another man
sees you and thinks you are beautiful and it is all to do over. Now I think I am past it, but
it still might come. You are lucky, guapa, that you are not ugly.”
 “But I am ugly,” Maria insisted.
 “Ask him,” said Pilar. “And don’t put thy feet in the stream because it will freeze them.”
 “If Roberto says we should go, I think we should go,” Maria said.
 “Listen to you,” Pilar said. “I have as much at stake in this as thy Roberto and I say
that we are well off resting here by the stream and that there is much time. Furthermore,
I like to talk. It is the only civilized thing we have. How otherwise can we divert
ourselves? Does what I say not hold interest for you, Inglés?”
 “You speak very well. But there are other things that interest me more than talk of
beauty or lack of beauty.”
 “Then let us talk of what interests thee.”
 “Where were you at the start of the movement?”
 “In my town.”
 “Avila?”
 “Qué va, Avila.”
 “Pablo said he was from Avila.”
 “He lies. He wanted to take a big city for his town. It was this town,” and she named a
town.
 “And what happened?”
 “Much,” the woman said. “Much. And all of it ugly. Even that which was glorious.”
 “Tell me about it,” Robert Jordan said.
 “It is brutal,” the woman said. “I do not like to tell it before the girl.”
 “Tell it,” said Robert Jordan. “And if it is not for her, that she should not listen.”
 “I can hear it,” Maria said. She put her hand on Robert Jordan’s. “There is nothing that
I cannot hear.”
 “It isn’t whether you can hear it,” Pilar said. “It is whether I should tell it to thee and
make thee bad dreams.”
 “I will not get bad dreams from a story,” Maria told her. “You think after all that has
happened with us I should get bad dreams from a story?”
 “Maybe it will give the Inglés bad dreams.”
 “Try it and see.”
 “No, Inglés, I am not joking. Didst thou see the start of the movement in any small
town?”
 “No,” Robert Jordan said.
 “Then thou hast seen nothing. Thou hast seen the ruin that now is Pablo, but you
should have seen Pablo on that day.”
 “Tell it.”
 “Nay. I do not want to.”
 “Tell it.”
 “All right, then. I will tell it truly as it was. But thee, guapa, if it reaches a point that it
molests thee, tell me.”
 “I will not listen to it if it molests me,” Maria told her. “It cannot be worse than many
things.”
 “I believe it can,” the woman said. “Give me another cigarette, Inglés, and vamonos.”
 The girl leaned back against the heather on the bank of the stream and Robert Jordan
stretched himself out, his shoulders against the ground and his head against a clump of
the heather. He reached out and found Maria’s hand and held it in his, rubbing their two
hands against the heather until she opened her hand and laid it flat on top of his as they
listened.
 “It was early in the morning when the civiles surrendered at the barracks,” Pilar began.
“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway 56
 “You had assaulted the barracks?” Robert Jordan asked.
 “Pablo had surrounded it in the dark, cut the telephone wires, placed dynamite under
one wall and called on the guardia civil to surrender. They would not. And at daylight he
blew the wall open. There was fighting. Two civiles were killed. Four were wounded and
four surrendered.
 “We all lay on roofs and on the ground and at the edge of walls and of buildings in the
early morning light and the dust cloud of the explosion had not yet settled, for it rose
high in the air and there was no wind to carry it, and all of us were firing into the broken
side of the building, loading and firing into the smoke, and from within there was still the
flashing of rifles and then there was a shout from in the smoke not to fire more, and out
came the four civiles with their hands up. A big part of the roof had fallen in and the wall
was gone and they came out to surrender.
 “‘Are there more inside?’ Pablo shouted.
 “‘There are wounded.’
 “‘Guard these,’ Pablo said to four who had come up from where we were firing. ‘Stand
there. Against the wall,’ he told the civiles. The four civiles stood against the wall, dirty,
dusty, smoke-grimed, with the four who were guarding them pointing their guns at them
and Pablo and the others went in to finish the wounded.
 “After they had done this and there was no longer any noise of the wounded, neither
groaning, nor crying out, nor the noise of shooting in the barracks, Pablo and the others
came out and Pablo had his shotgun over his back and was carrying in his hand a
Mauser pistol.
 “‘Look, Pilar,’ he said. ‘This was in the hand of the officer who killed himself. Never
have I fired a pistol. You,’ he said to one of the guards, ‘show me how it works. No.
Don’t show me. Tell me.’
 “The four civiles had stood against the wall, sweating and saying nothing while the
shooting had gone on inside the barracks. They were all tall men with the faces of
guardias civiles, which is the same model of face as mine is. Except that their faces
were covered with the small stubble of this their last morning of not yet being shaved
and they stood there against the wall and said nothing.
 “‘You,’ said Pablo to the one who stood nearest him. ‘Tell me how it works.’
 “‘Pull the small lever down,’ the man said in a very dry voice. ‘Pull the receiver back
and let it snap forward.’
 “‘What is the receiver?’ asked Pablo, and he looked at the four civiles. ‘What is the
receiver?’
 “‘The block on top of the action.’
 “Pablo pulled it back, but it stuck. ‘What now?’ he said. ‘It is jammed. You have lied to
me.’
 “‘Pull it farther back and let it snap lightly forward,’ the civil said, and I have never
heard such a tone of voice. It was grayer than a morning without sunrise.
 “Pablo pulled and let go as the man had told him and the block snapped forward into
place and the pistol was cocked with the hammer back. It is an ugly pistol, small in the
round handle, large and flat in the barrel, and unwieldy. All this time the civiles had been
watching him and they had said nothing.
 “‘What are you going to do with us?’ one asked him.
 “‘Shoot thee,’ Pablo said.
 “‘When?’ the man asked in the same gray voice.
 “‘Now,’ said Pablo.
 “‘Where?’ asked the man.
 “‘Here,’ said Pablo. ‘Here. Now. Here and now. Have you anything to say?’
 “‘Nada,’ said the civil. ‘Nothing. But it is an ugly thing.’
 “‘And you are an ugly thing,’ Pablo said. ‘You murderer of peasants. You who would
shoot your own mother.’
 “‘I have never killed any one,’ the civil said. ‘And do not speak of my mother.’
 “‘Show us how to die. You, who have always done the killing.’
“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway 57
 “‘There is no necessity to insult us,’ another civil said. ‘And we know how to die.’
 “‘Kneel down against the wall with your heads against the wall,’ Pablo told them. The
civiles looked at one another.
 “‘Kneel, I say,’ Pablo said. ‘Get down and kneel.’
 “‘How does it seem to you, Paco?’ one civil said to the tallest, who had spoken with
Pablo about the pistol. He wore a corporal’s stripes on his sleeves and was sweating
very much although the early morning was still cool.
 “‘It is as well to kneel,’ he answered. ‘It is of no importance.’
 “‘It is closer to the earth,’ the first one who had spoken said, trying to make a joke, but
they were all too grave for a joke and no one smiled.
 “‘Then let us kneel,’ the first civil said, and the four knelt, looking very awkward with
their heads against the wall and their hands by their sides, and Pablo passed behind
them and shot each in turn in the back of the head with the pistol, going from one to
another and putting the barrel of the pistol against the back of their heads, each man
slipping down as he fired. I can hear the pistol still, sharp and yet muffled, and see the
barrel jerk and the head of the man drop forward. One held his head still when the pistol
touched it. One pushed his head forward and pressed his forehead against the stone.
One shivered in his whole body and his head was shaking. Only one put his hands in
front of his eyes, and he was the last one, and the four bodies were slumped against the
wall when Pablo turned away from them and came toward us with the pistol still in his
hand.
 “‘Hold this for me, Pilar,’ he said. ‘I do not know how to put down the hammer,’ and he
handed me the pistol and stood there looking at the four guards as they lay against the
wall of the barracks. All those who were with us stood there too, looking at them, and no
one said anything.
 “We had won the town and it was still early in the morning and no one had eaten nor
had any one drunk coffee and we looked at each other and we were all powdered with
dust from the blowing up of the barracks, as powdered as men are at a threshing, and I
stood holding the pistol and it was heavy in my hand and I felt weak in the stomach
when I looked at the guards dead there against the wall; they all as gray and as dusty as
we were, but each one was now moistening with his blood the dry dirt by the wall where
they lay. And as we stood there the sun rose over the far hills and shone now on the
road where we stood and on the white wall of the barracks and the dust in the air was
golden in that first sun and the peasant who was beside me looked at the wall of the
barracks and what lay there and then looked at us and then at the sun and said, ‘Vaya,
a day that commences.’
 “‘Now let us go and get coffee,’ I said.
 “‘Good, Pilar, good,’ he said. And we went up into the town to the Plaza, and those
were the last people who were shot in the village.”
 “What happened to the others?” Robert Jordan asked. “Were there no other fascists in
the village?”
 “Qué va, were there no other fascists? There were more than twenty. But none was
shot.”
 “What was done?”
 “Pablo had them beaten to death with flails and thrown from the top of the cliff into the
river.”
 “All twenty?”
 “I will tell you. It is not so simple. And in my life never do I wish to see such a scene as
the flailing to death in the plaza on the top of the cliff above the river.
 “The town is built on the high bank above the river and there is a square there with a
fountain and there are benches and there are big trees that give a shade for the
benches. The balconies of the houses look out on the plaza. Six streets enter on the
plaza and there is an arcade from the houses that goes around the plaza so that one
can walk in the shade of the arcade when the sun is hot. On three sides of the plaza is
the arcade and on the fourth side is the walk shaded by the trees beside the edge of the
“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway 58
cliff with, far below, the river. It is three hundred feet down to the river.
 “Pablo organized it all as he did the attack on the barracks. First he had the entrances
to the streets blocked off with carts as though to organize the plaze for a capea. For an
amateur bullfight. The fascists were all held in the Ayuntamiento, the city hall, which was
the largest building on one side of the plaza. It was there the clock was set in the wall
and it was in the buildings under the arcade that the club of the fascists was. And under
the arcade on the sidewalk in front of their club was where they had their chairs and
tables for their club. It was there, before the movement, that they were accustomed to
take the apéritifs. The chairs and the tables were of wicker. It looked like a café but was
more elegant.”
 “But was there no fighting to take them?”
 “Pablo had them seized in the night before he assaulted the barracks. But he had
already surrounded the barracks. They were all seized in their homes at the same hour
the attack started. That was intelligent. Pablo is an organizer. Otherwise he would have
had people attacking him at his flanks and at his rear while he was assaulting the
barracks of the guardia civil.
 “Pablo is very intelligent but very brutal. He had this of the village well planned and
well ordered. Listen. After the assault was successful, and the last four guards had
surrendered, and he had shot them against the wall, and we had drunk coffee at the
café that always opened earliest in the morning by the corner from which the early bus
left, he proceeded to the organization of the plaza. Carts were piled exactly as for a
capea except that the side toward the river was not enclosed. That was left open. Then
Pablo ordered the priest to confess the fascists and give them the necessary
sacraments.”
 “Where was this done?”
 “In the Ayuntamiento, as I said. There was a great crowd outside and while this was
going on inside with the priest, there was some levity outside and shouting of
obscenities, but most of the people were very serious and respectful. Those who made
jokes were those who were already drunk from the celebration of the taking of the
barracks and there were useless characters who would have been drunk at any time.
 “While the priest was engaged in these duties, Pablo organized those in the plaza into
two lines.
 “He placed them in two lines as you would place men for a rope pulling contest, or as
they stand in a city to watch the ending of a bicycle road race with just room for the
cyclists to pass between, or as men stood to allow the passage of a holy image in a
procession. Two meters was left between the lines and they extended from the door of
the Ayuntamiento clear across the plaza to the edge of the cliff. So that, from the
doorway of the Ayuntamiento, looking across the plaza, one coming out would see two
solid lines of people waiting.
 “They were armed with flails such as are used to beat out the grain and they were a
good flail’s length apart. All did not have flails, as enough flails could not be obtained.
But most had flails obtained from the store of Don Guillermo Martin, who was a fascist
and sold all sorts of agricultural implements. And those who did not have flails had
heavy herdsman’s clubs, or ox-goads, and some had wooden pitchforks; those with
wooden tines that are used to fork the chaff and straw into the air after the flailing. Some
had sickles and reaping hooks but these Pablo placed at the far end where the lines
reached the edge of the cliff.
 “These lines were quiet and it was a clear day, as today is clear, and there were
clouds high in the sky, as there are now, and the plaza was not yet dusty for there had
been a heavy dew in the night, and the trees cast a shade over the men in the lines and
you could hear the water running from the brass pipe in the mouth of the lion and falling
into the bowl of the fountain where the women bring the water jars to fill them.
 “Only near the Ayuntamiento, where the priest was complying with his duties with the
fascists, was there any ribaldry, and that came from those worthless ones who, as I
said, were already drunk and were crowded around the windows shouting obscenities
“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway 59
and jokes in bad taste in through the iron bars of the windows. Most of’ the men in the
lines were waiting quietly and I heard one say to another, ‘Will there be women?’
 “And another said, ‘I hope to Christ, no.’
 “Then one said, ‘Here is the woman of Pablo. Listen, Pilar. Will there be women?’
 “I looked at him and he was a peasant dressed in his Sunday jacket and sweating
heavily and I said, ‘No, Joaquín. There are no women. We are not killing the women.
Why should we kill their women?’
 “And he said, ‘Thanks be to Christ, there are no women and when does it start?’
 “And I said, ‘As soon as the priest finishes.’
 “‘And the priest?’
 “‘I don’t know,’ I told him and I saw his face working and the sweat coming down on
his forehead. ‘I have never killed a man,’ he said.
 “‘Then you will learn,’ the peasant next to him said. ‘But I do not think one blow with
this will kill a man,’ and he held his flail in both hands and looked at it with doubt.
 “‘That is the beauty of it,’ another peasant said. ‘There must be many blows.’
 “‘They have taken Valladolid. They have Avila,’ some one said. ‘I heard that before we
came into town.’
 “‘They will never take this town. This town is ours. We have struck ahead of them,’ I
said. ‘Pablo is not one to wait for them to strike.’
 “‘Pablo is able,’ another said. ‘But in this finishing off of the civiles he was egoistic.
Don’t you think so, Pilar?’
 “‘Yes,’ I said. ‘But now all are participating in this.’
 “‘Yes,’ he said. ‘It is well organized. But why do we not hear more news of the
movement?’
 “‘Pablo cut the telephone wires before the assault on the barracks. They are not yet
repaired.’
 “‘Ah,’ he said. ‘It is for this we hear nothing. I had my news from the roadmender’s
station early this morning.’
 “‘Why is this done thus, Pilar?’ he said to me.
 “‘To save bullets,’ I said. ‘And that each man should have his share in the
responsibility.’
 “‘That it should start then. That it should start.’ And I looked at him and saw that he
was crying.
 “‘Why are you crying, Joaquín?’ I asked him. ‘This is not to cry about’
 “‘I cannot help it, Pilar,’ he said. ‘I have never killed any one.’
 “If you have not seen the day of revolution in a small town where all know all in the
town and always have known all, you have seen nothing. And on this day most of the
men in the double line across the plaza wore the clothes in which they worked in the
fields, having come into town hurriedly, but some, not knowing how one should dress for
the first day of a movement, wore their clothes for Sundays or holidays, and these,
seeing that the others, including those who had attacked the barracks, wore their oldest
clothes, were ashamed of being wrongly dressed. But they did not like to take off their
jackets for fear of losing them, or that they might be stolen by the worthless ones, and
so they stood, sweating in the sun and waiting for it to commence.
 “Then the wind rose and the dust was now dry in the plaza for the men walking and
standing and shuffling had loosened it and it commenced to blow and a man in a dark
blue Sunday jacket shouted ‘Agua! Agua!’ and the caretaker of the plaza, whose duty it
was to sprinkle the plaza each morning with a hose, came and turned the hose on and
commenced to lay the dust at the edge of the plaza, and then toward the center. Then
the two lines fell back and let him lay the dust over the center of the plaza; the hose
sweeping in wide arcs and the water glistening in the sun and the men leaning on their
flails or the clubs or the white wood pitchforks and watching the sweep of the stream of
water. And then, when the plaza was nicely moistened and the dust settled, the lines
formed up again and a peasant shouted, ‘When do we get the first fascist? When does
the first one come out of the box?’
“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway 60
 “‘Soon,’ Pablo shouted from the door of the Ayuntamiento. ‘Soon the first one comes
out.’ His voice was hoarse from shouting in the assault and from the smoke of the
barracks.
 “‘What’s the delay?’ some one asked.
 “‘They’re still occupied with their sins,’ Pablo shouted.
 “‘Clearly, there are twenty of them,’ a man said.
 “‘More,’ said another.
 “‘Among twenty there are many sins to recount.’
 “‘Yes, but I think it’s a trick to gain time. Surely facing such an emergency one could
not remember one’s sins except for the biggest.’
 “‘Then have patience. For with more than twenty of them there are enough of the
biggest sins to take some time.’
 “‘I have patience,’ said the other. ‘But it is better to get it over with. Both for them and
for us. It is July and there is much work. We have harvested but we have not threshed.
We are not yet in the time of fairs and festivals.’
 “‘But this will be a fair and festival today,’ another said. ‘The Fair of Liberty and from
this day, when these are extinguished, the town and the land are ours.’
 “‘We thresh fascists today,’ said one, ‘and out of the chaff comes the freedom of this
pueblo.’
 “‘We must administer it well to deserve it,’ said another. ‘Pilar,’ he said to me, ‘when
do we have a meeting for organization?’
 “‘Immediately after this is completed,’ I told him. ‘In the same building of the
Ayuntamiento.’
 “I was wearing one of the three-cornered patent leather hats of the guardia civil as a
joke and I had put the hammer down on the pistol, holding it with my thumb to lower it as
I pulled on the trigger as seemed natural, and the pistol was held in a rope I had around
my waist, the long barrel stuck under the rope. And when I put it on the joke seemed
very good to me, although afterwards I wished I had taken the holster of the pistol
instead of the hat. But one of the men in the line said to me, ‘Pilar, daughter. It seems to
me bad taste for thee to wear that hat. Now we have finished with such things as the
guardia civil.’
 “‘Then,’ I said, ‘I will take it off.’ And I did.
 “‘Give it to me,’ he said. ‘It should be destroyed.’
 “And as we were at the far end of the line where the walk runs along the cliff by the
river, he took the hat in his hand and sailed it off over the cliff with the motion a
herdsman makes throwing a stone underhand at the bulls to herd them. The hat sailed
far out into space and we could see it smaller and smaller, the patent leather shining in
the clear air, sailing down to the river. I looked back over the square and at all the
windows and all the balconies there were people crowded and there was the double line
of men across the square to the doorway of the Ayuntamiento and the crowd swarmed
Outside against the windows of that building and there was the noise of many people
talking, and then I heard a shout and some one said ‘Here comes the first one,’ and it
was Don Benito Garcia, the Mayor, and he came out bareheaded walking slowly from
the door and down the porch and nothing happened; and he walked between the line of
men with the flails and nothing happened. He passed two men, four men, eight men, ten
men and nothing happened and he was walking between that line of men, his head up,
his fat face gray, his eyes looking ahead and then flickering from side to side and
walking steadily. And nothing happened.
 “From a balcony some one cried out, ‘Qué pasa, cobardes? What is the matter,
cowards?’ and still Don Benito walked along between the men and nothing happened.
Then I saw a man three men down from where I was standing and his face was working
and he was biting his lips and his hands were white on his flail. I saw him looking toward
Don Benito, watching him come on. And still nothing happened. Then, just before Don
Benito came abreast of this man, the man raised his flail high so that it struck the man
beside him and smashed a blow at Don Benito that hit him on the side of the head and
“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway 61
Don Benito looked at him and the man struck again and shouted, ‘That for you, Cabron,’
and the blow hit Don Benito in the face and he raised his hands to his face and they
beat him until he fell and the man who had struck him first called to others to help him
and he pulled on the collar of Don Benito’s shirt and others took hold of his arms and
with his face in the dust of the plaza, they dragged him over the walk to the edge of the
cliff and threw him over and into the river. And the man who hit him first was kneeling by
the edge of the cliff looking over after him and saying, ‘The Cabron! The Cabron! Oh,
the Cabron!’ He was a tenant of Don Benito and they had never gotten along together.
There had been a dispute about a piece of land by the river that Don Benito had taken
from this man and let to another and this man had long hated him. This man did not join
the line again but sat by the cliff looking down where Don Benito had fallen.
 “After Don Benito no one would come out. There was no noise now in the plaza as all
were waiting to see who it was that would come out. Then a drunkard shouted in a great
voice, ‘Qué salga el toro! Let the bull out!’
 “Then some one from by the windows of the Ayuntamiento yelled, ‘They won’t move!
They are all praying!’
 “Another drunkard shouted, ‘Pull them out. Come on, pull them out. The time for
praying is finished.’
 “But none came out and then I saw a man coming out of the door.
 “It was Don Federico Gonzalez, who owned the mill and feed store and was a fascist
of the first order. He was tall and thin and his hair was brushed over the top of his head
from one side to the other to cover a baldness and he wore a nightshirt that was tucked
into his trousers. He was barefooted as when he had been taken from his home and he
walked ahead of Pablo holding his hands above his head, and Pablo walked behind him
with the barrels of his shotgun pressing against the back of Don Federico Gonzalez until
Don Federico entered the double line. But when Pablo left him and returned to the door
of the Ayuntamiento, Don Federico could not walk forward, and stood there, his eyes
turned up to heaven and his hands reaching up as though they would grasp the sky.
 “‘He has no legs to walk,’ some one said.
 “‘What’s the matter, Don Federico? Can’t you walk?’ some one shouted to him. But
Don Federico stood there with his hands up and only his lips were moving.
 “‘Get on,’ Pablo shouted to him from the steps. ‘Walk.’
 “Don Federico stood there and could not move. One of the drunkards poked him in the
backside with a flail handle and Don Federico gave a quick jump as a balky horse might,
but still stood in the same place, his hands up, and his eyes up toward the sky.
 “Then the peasant who stood beside me said, ‘This is shameful. I have nothing
against him but such a spectacle must terminate.’ So he walked down the line and
pushed through to where Don Federico was standing and said, ‘With your permission,’
and hit him a great blow alongside of the head with a club.
 “Then Don Federico dropped his hands and put them over the top of his head where
the bald place was and with his head bent and covered by his hands, the thin long hairs
that covered the bald place escaping through his fingers, he ran fast through the double
line With flails falling on his back and shoulders until he fell and those at the end of the
line picked him up and swung him over the cliff. Never did he open his mouth from the
moment he came out pushed by the shotgun of Pablo. His only difficulty was to move
forward. It was as though he had no command of his legs.
 “After Don Federico, I saw there was a concentration of the hardest men at the end of
the lines by the edge of the cliff and I left there and I went to the Arcade of the
Ayuntamiento and pushed aside two drunkards and looked in the window. In the big
room of the Ayuntamiento they were all kneeling in a half circle praying and the priest
was kneeling and praying with them. Pablo and one named Cuatro Dedos, Four
Fingers, a cobbler, who was much with Pablo then, and two others were standing with
shotguns and Pablo said to the priest, ‘Who goes now?’ and the priest went on praying
and did not answer him.
 “‘Listen, you,’ Pablo said to the priest in his hoarse voice, ‘who goes now? Who is
“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway 62
ready now?’
 “The priest would not speak to Pablo and acted as though he were not there and I
could see Pablo was becoming very angry.
 “‘Let us all go together,’ Don Ricardo Montalvo, who was a land owner, said to Pablo,
raising his head and stopping praying to speak.
 “‘Qué va,’ said Pablo. ‘One at a time as you are ready.’
 “‘Then I go now,’ Don Ricardo said. ‘I’ll never be any more ready.’ The priest blessed
him as he spoke and blessed him again as he stood up, without interrupting his praying,
and held up a crucifix for Don Ricardo to kiss and Don Ricardo kissed it and then turned
and said to Pablo, ‘Nor ever again as ready. You Cabron of the bad milk. Let us go.’
 “Don Ricardo was a short man with gray hair and a thick neck and he had a shirt on
with no collar. He was bow-legged from much horseback riding. ‘Good-by,’ he said to all
those who were kneeling. ‘Don’t be sad. To die is nothing. The only bad thing is to die at
the hands of this canalla. Don’t touch me,’ he said to Pablo. ‘Don’t touch me with your
shotgun.’
 “He walked out of the front of the Ayuntamiento with his gray hair and his small gray
eyes and his thick neck looking very short and angry. He looked at the double line of
peasants and he spat on the ground. He could spit actual saliva which, in such a
circumstance, as you should know, Inglés, is very rare and he said, ‘Arriba Espana!
Down with the miscalled Republic and I obscenity in the milk of your fathers.’
 “So they clubbed him to death very quickly because of the insult, beating him as soon
as he reached the first of the men, beating him as he tried to walk with his head up,
beating him until he fell and chopping at him with reaping hooks and the sickles, and
many men bore him to the edge of the cliff to throw him over and there was blood now
on their hands and on their clothing, and now began to be the feeling that these who
came out were truly enemies and should be killed.
 “Until Don Ricardo came out with that fierceness and calling those insults, many in the
line would have given much, I am sure, never to have been in the line. And if any one
had shouted from the line, ‘Come, let us pardon the rest of them. Now they have had
their lesson,’ I am sure most would have agreed.
 “But Don Ricardo with all his bravery did a great disservice to the others. For he
aroused the men in the line and where, before, they were performing a duty and with no
great taste for it, now they were angry, and the difference was apparent.
 “‘Let the priest out and the thing will go faster,’ some one shouted.
 “‘Let out the priest.’
 “‘We’ve had three thieves, let us have the priest.’
 “‘Two thieves,’ a short peasant said to the man who had shouted. ‘It was two thieves
with Our Lord.’
 “‘Whose Lord?’ the man said, his face angry and red.
 “‘In the manner of speaking it is said Our Lord.’
 “‘He isn’t my Lord; not in joke,’ said the other. ‘And thee hadst best watch thy mouth if
thou dost not want to walk between the lines.’
 “‘I am as good a Libertarian Republican as thou,’ the short peasant said. ‘I struck Don
Ricardo across the mouth. I struck Don Federico across the back. I missed Don Benito.
But I say Our Lord is the formal way of speaking of the man in question and that it was
two thieves.’
 “‘I obscenity in the milk of thy Republicanism. You speak of Don this and Don that.’
 “‘Here are they so called.’
 “‘Not by me, the cabrones. And thy Lord— Hi! Here comes a new one!’
 “It was then that we saw a disgraceful sight, for the man who walked out of the
doorway of the Ayuntamiento was Don Faustino Rivero, the oldest son of his father, Don
Celestino Rivero, a land owner. He was tall and his hair was yellow and it was freshly
combed back from his forehead for he always carried a comb in his pocket and he had
combed his hair now before coming out. He was a great annoyer of girls, and he was a
coward, and he had always wished to be an amateur bullfighter. He went much with
“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway 63
gypsies and with builfighters and with bull raisers and delighted to wear the Andalucian
costume, but he had no courage and was considered a joke. One time he was
announced to appear in an amateur benefit fight for the old people’s home in Avila and
to kill a bull from on horseback in the Andalucian style, which he had spent much time
practising, and when he had seen the size of the bull that had been substituted for him
in place of the little one, weak in the legs, he had picked out himself, he had said he was
sick and, some said, put three fingers down his throat to make himself vomit.
 “When the lines saw him, they commenced to shout, ‘Hola, Don Faustino. Take care
not to vomit.’
 “‘Listen to me, Don Faustino. There are beautiful girls over the cliff.’
 “‘Don Faustino. Wait a minute and we will bring out a bull bigger than the other.’
 “And another shouted, ‘Listen to me, Don Faustino. Hast thou ever heard speak of
death?’
 “Don Faustino stood there, still acting brave. He was still under the impulse that had
made him announce to the others that he was going out. It was the same impulse that
had made him announce himself for the bullfight. That had made him believe and hope
that he could be an amateur matador. Now he was inspired by the example of Don
Ricardo and he stood there looking both handsome and brave and he made his face
scornful. But he could not speak.
 “‘Come, Don Faustino,’ some one called from the line. ‘Come, Don Faustino. Here is
the biggest bull of all.’
 “Don Faustino stood looking out and I think as he looked, that there was no pity for
him on either side of the line. Still he looked both handsome and superb; but time was
shortening and there was only one direction to go.
 “‘Don Faustino,’ some one called. ‘What are you waiting for, Don Faustino?’
 “‘He is preparing to vomit,’ some one said and the lines laughed.
 “‘Don Faustino,’ a peasant called. ‘Vomit if it will give thee pleasure. To me it is all the
same.’
 “Then, as we watched, Don Faustino looked along the lines and across the square to
the cliff and then when he saw the cliff and the emptiness beyond, he turned quickly and
ducked back toward the entrance of the Ayuntamiento.
 “All the lines roared and some one shouted in a high voice, ‘Where do you go, Don
Faustino? Where do you go?’
 “‘He goes to throw up,’ shouted another and they all laughed again.
 “Then we saw Don Faustino coming out again with Pablo behind him with the shotgun.
All of his style was gone now. The sight of the lines had taken away his type and his
style and he came out now with Pablo behind him as though Pablo were cleaning a
Street and Don Faustino was what he was pushing ahead of him. Don Faustino came
out now and he was crossing himself and praying and then he put his hands in front of
his eyes and walked down the steps toward the lines.
 “‘Leave him alone,’ some one shouted. ‘Don’t touch him.’
 “The lines understood and no one made a move to touch Don Faustino and, with his
hands shaking and held in front of his eyes, and with his mouth moving, he walked
along between the lines.
 “No one said anything and no one touched him and, when he was halfway through the
lines, he could go no farther and fell to his knees.
 “No one struck him. I was walking along parallel to the line to see what happened to
him and a peasant leaned down and lifted him to his feet and said, ‘Get up, Don
Faustino, and keep walking. The bull has not yet come out.’
 “Don Faustino could not walk alone and the peasant in a black smock helped him on
one side and another peasant in a black smock and herdsman’s boots helped him on
the other, supporting him by the arms and Don Faustino walking along between the
lines with his hands over his eyes, his lips never quiet, and his yellow hair slicked on his
head and shining in the sun, and as he passed the peasants would say, ‘Don Faustino,
buen provecho. Don Faustino, that you should have a good appetite,’ and others said,
“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway 64
‘Don Faustino, a sus ordenes. Don Faustino at your orders,’ and one, who had failed at
bullfighting himself, said, ‘Don Faustino. Matador, a sus ordenes,’ and another said,
‘Don Faustino, there are beautiful girls in heaven, Don Faustino.’ And they walked Don
Faustino through the lines, holding him close on either side, holding him up as he
walked, with him with his hands over his eyes. But he must have looked through his
fingers, because when they came to the edge of the cliff with him, he knelt again,
throwing himself down and clutching the ground and holding to the grass, saying, ‘No.
No. No. Please. NO. Please. Please. No. No.’
 “Then the peasants who were with him and the others, the hard ones of the end of the
line, squatted quickly behind him as he knelt, and gave him a rushing push and he was
over the edge without ever having been beaten and you heard him crying loud and high
as he fell.
 “It was then I knew that the lines had become cruel and it was first the insults of Don
Ricardo and second the cowardice of Don Faustino that had made them so.
 “‘Let us have another,’ a peasant called out and another peasant slapped him on the
back and said, ‘Don Faustino! What a thing! Don Faustino!’
 “‘He’s seen the big bull now,’ another said. ‘Throwing up will never help him, now.’
 “‘In my life,’ another peasant said, ‘in my life I’ve never seen a thing like Don Faustino.’
 “‘There are others,’ another peasant said. ‘Have patience. Who knows what we may
yet see?’
 “‘There may be giants and dwarfs,’ the first peasant said. ‘There may be Negroes and
rare beasts from Africa. But for me never, never will there be anything like Don Faustino.
But let’s have another one! Come on. Let’s have another one!’
 “The drunkards were handing around bottles of anis and cognac that they had looted
from the bar of the club of the fascists, drinking them down like wine, and many of the
men in the lines were beginning to be a little drunk, too, from drinking after the strong
emotion of Don Benito, Don Federico, Don Ricardo and especially Don Faustino. Those
who did not drink from the bottles of liquor were drinking from leather wineskins that
were passed about and one handed a wineskin to me and I took a long drink, letting the
wine run cool down my throat from the leather bota for I was very thirsty, too.
 “‘To kill gives much thirst,’ the man with the wineskin said to me.
 “‘Qué va,’ I said. ‘Hast thou killed?’
 “‘We have killed four,’ he said, proudly. ‘Not counting the civiles. Is it true that thee
killed one of the civiles, Pilar?’
 “‘Not one,’ I said. ‘I shot into the smoke when the wall fell, as did the others. That is
all.’
 “‘Where got thee the pistol, Pilar?’
 “‘From Pablo. Pablo gave it to me after he killed the civiles.’
 “‘Killed he them with this pistol?’
 “‘With no other,’ I said. ‘And then he armed me with it.’
 “‘Can I see it, Pilar? Can I hold it?’
 “‘Why not, man?’ I said, and I took it out from under the rope and handed it to him. But
I was wondering why no one else had come out and just then who should come out but
Don Guillermo Martin from whose store the flails, the herdsman’s clubs, and the wooden
pitchforks had been taken. Don Guillermo was a fascist but otherwise there Was nothing
against him.
 “It is true he paid little to those who made the flails but he charged little for them too
and if one did not wish to buy flails from Don Guillermo, it was possible to make them for
nothing more than the cost of the wood and the leather. He had a rude way of speaking
and he was undoubtedly a fascist and a member of their club and he sat at noon and at
evening in the cane chairs of their club to read El Debate, to have his shoes shined, and
to drink vermouth and seltzer and eat roasted almonds, dried shrimps, and anchovies.
But one does not kill for that, and I am sure if it had not been for the insults of Don
Ricardo Montalvo and the lamentable spectacle of Don Faustino, and the drinking
consequent on the emotion of them and the others, some one would have shouted,
“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway 65
‘That Don Guillermo should go in peace. We have his flails. Let him go.’
 “Because the people of this town are as kind as they can be cruel and they have a
natural sense of justice and a desire to do that which is right. But cruelty had entered
into the lines and also drunkenness or the beginning of drunkenness and the lines were
not as they were when Don Benito had come out. I do not know how it is in other
countries, and no one cares more for the pleasure of drinking than I do, but in Spain
drunkenness, when produced by other elements than wine, is a thing of great ugliness
and the people do things that they would not have done. Is it not so in your country,
Inglés?”
 “It is so,” Robert Jordan said. “When I was seven years old and going with my mother
to attend a wedding in the state of Ohio at which I was to be the boy of a pair of boy and
girl who carried flowers—”
 “Did you do that?” asked Maria. “How nice!”
 “In this town a Negro was hanged to a lamp post and later burned. It was an arc light.
A light which lowered from the post to the pavement. And he was hoisted, first by the
mechanism which was used to hoist the arc light but this broke—”
 “A Negro,” Maria said. “How barbarous!”
 “Were the people drunk?” asked Pilar. “Were they drunk thus to burn a Negro?”
 “I do not know,” Robert Jordan said. “Because I saw it only looking out from under the
blinds of a window in the house which stood on the corner where the arc light was. The
street was full of people and when they lifted the Negro up for the second time—”
 “If you had only seven years and were in a house, you could not tell if they were drunk
or not,” Pilar said.
 “As I said, when they lifted the Negro up for the second time, my mother pulled me
away from the window, so I saw no more,” Robert Jordan said. “But since I have had
experiences which demonstrate that drunkenness is the same in my country. It is ugly
and brutal.”
 “You were too young at seven,” Maria said. “You were too young for such things. I
have never seen a Negro except in a circus. Unless the Moors are Negroes.”
 “Some are Negroes and some are not,” Pilar said. “I can talk to you of the Moors.”
 “Not as I can,” Maria said. “Nay, not as I can.”
 “Don’t speak of such things,” Pilar said. “It is unhealthy. Where were we?”
 “Speaking of the drunkenness of the lines,” Robert Jordan said. “Go on.”
 “It is not fair to say drunkenness,” Pilar said. “For, yet, they were a long way from
drunkenness. But already there was a change in them, and when Don Guillermo came
out, standing straight, near-sighted, gray-headed, of medium height, with a shirt with a
collar button but no collar, standing there and crossing himself once and looking ahead,
but seeing little without his glasses, but walking forward well and calmly, he was an
appearance to excite pity. But some one shouted from the line, ‘Here, Don Guillermo.
Up here, Don Guillermo. In this direction. Here we all have your products.’
 “They had had such success joking at Don Faustino that they could not see, now, that
Don Guillermo was a different thing, and if Don Guillermo was to be killed, he should be
killed quickly and with dignity.
 “‘Don Guillermo,’ another shouted. ‘Should we send to the house for thy spectacles?’
 “Don Guillermo’s house was no house, since he had not much money and was only a
fascist to be a snob and to console himself that he must work for little, running a
wooden-implement shop. He was a fascist, too, from the religiousness of his wife which
he accepted as his own due to his love for her. He lived in an apartment in the building
three houses down the square and when Don Guillermo stood there, looking nearsightedly at the lines, the double lines he knew he must enter, a woman started to
scream from the balcony of the apartment where he lived. She could see him from the
balcony and she was his wife.
 “‘Guillermo,’ she cried. ‘Guillermo. Wait and I will be with thee.’
 “Don Guillermo turned his head toward where the shouting came from. He could not
see her. He tried to say something but he could not. Then he waved his hand in the
“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway 66
direction the woman had called from and started to walk between the lines.
 “‘Guillermo!’ she cried. ‘Guillermo! Oh, Guillermo!’ She was holding her hands on the
rail of the balcony and shaking back and forth. ‘Guillermo!’
 “Don Guillermo waved his hand again toward the noise and walked into the lines with
his head up and you would not have known what he was feeling except for the color of
his face.
 “Then some drunkard yelled, ‘Guillermo!’ from the lines, imitating the high cracked
voice of his wife and Don Guillermo rushed toward the man, blindly, with tears now
running down his cheeks and the man hit him hard across the face with his flail and Don
Guillermo sat down from the force of the blow and sat there crying, but not from fear,
while the drunkards beat him and one drunkard jumped on top of him, astride his
shoulders, and beat him with a bottle. After this many of the men left the lines and their
places were taken by the drunkards who had been jeering and saying things in bad
taste through the windows of the Ayuntamiento.
 “I myself had felt much emotion at the shooting of the guardia civil by Pablo,” Pilar
said. “It was a thing of great ugliness, but I had thought if this is how it must be, this is
how it must be, and at least there was no cruelty, only the depriving of life which, as we
all have learned in these years, is a thing of ugliness but also a necessity to do if we are
to win, and to preserve the Republic.
 “When the square had been closed off and the lines formed, I had admired and
understood it as a conception of Pablo, although it seemed to me to be somewhat
fantastic and that it would be necessary for all that was to be done to be done in good
taste if it were not to be repugnant. Certainly if the fascists were to be executed by the
people, it was better for all the people to have a part in it, and I wished to share the guilt
as much as any, just as I hoped to share in the benefits when the town should be ours.
But after Don Guillermo I felt a feeling of shame and distaste, and with the coming of the
drunkards and the worthless ones into the lines, and the abstention of those who left the
lines as a protest after Don Guillermo, I wished that I might disassociate myself
altogether from the lines, and I walked away, across the square, and sat down on a
bench under one of the big trees that gave shade there.
 “Two peasants from the lines walked over, talking together, and one of them called to
me, ‘What passes with thee, Pilar?’
 “‘Nothing, man,’ I told him.
 “‘Yes,’ he said. ‘Speak. What passes.’
 “‘I think that I have a belly-full,’ I told him.
 “‘Us, too,’ he said and they both sat down on the bench. One of them had a leather
wineskin and he handed it to me.
 “‘Rinse out thy mouth,’ he said and the other said, going on with the talking they had
been engaged in, ‘The worst is that it will bring bad luck. Nobody can tell me that such
things as the killing of Don Guillermo in that fashion will not bring bad luck.’
 “Then the other said, ‘If it is necessary to kill them all, and I am not convinced of that
necessity, let them be killed decently and without mockery.’
 “‘Mockery is justified in the case of Don Faustino,’ the other said. ‘Since he was
always a farcer and was never a serious man. But to mock such a serious man as Don
Guillermo is beyond all right.’
 “‘I have a belly-full,’ I told him, and it was literally true because I felt an actual sickness
in all of me inside and a sweating and a nausea as though I had swallowed bad sea
food.
 “‘Then, nothing,’ the one peasant said. ‘We will take no further part in it. But I wonder
what happens in the other towns.’
 “‘They have not repaired the telephone wires yet,’ I said. ‘It is a lack that should be
remedied.’
 “‘Clearly,’ he said. ‘Who knows but what we might be better employed putting the town
into a state of defense than massacring people with this slowness and brutality.’
 “‘I will go to speak with Pablo, I told them and I stood up from the bench and started
“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway 67
toward the arcade that led to the door of the Ayuntamiento from where the lines spread
across the square. The lines now were neither straight nor orderly and there was much
and very grave drunkenness. Two men had fallen down and lay on their backs in the
middle of the square and were passing a bottle back and forth between them. One
would take a drink and then shout, ‘Viva la Anarquia!’ lying on his back and shouting as
though he were a madman. He had a red-and-black handkerchief around his neck. The
other shouted, ‘Viva la Libertad!’ and kicked his feet in the air and then bellowed, ‘Viva
la Libertad!’ again. He had a red-andblack handkerchief too and he waved it in one hand
and waved the bottle with the other.
 “A peasant who had left the lines and now stood in the shade of the arcade looked at
them in disgust and said, ‘They should shout, “Long live drunkenness.” That’s all they
believe in.’
 “‘They don’t believe even in that,’ another peasant said. ‘Those neither understand nor
believe in anything.’
 “Just then, one of the drunkards got to his feet and raised both arms with his fists
clenched over his head and shouted, ‘Long live Anarchy and Liberty and I obscenity in
the milk of the Republic!’
 “The other drunkard who was still lying on his back, took hold of the ankle of the
drunkard who was shouting and rolled over so that the shouting drunkard fell with him,
and they rolled over together and then sat up and the one who had pulled the other
down put his arm around the shouter’s neck and then handed the shouter a bottle and
kissed the red-and-black handkerchief he wore and they both drank together.
 “Just then, a yelling went up from the lines and, looking up the arcade, I could not see
who it was that was coming out because the man’s head did not show above the heads
of those crowded about the door of the Ayuntamiento. All I could see was that some one
was being pushed out by Pablo and Cuatro Dedos with their shotguns but I could not
see who it was and I moved on close toward the lines where they were packed against
the door to try to see.
 “There was much pushing now and the chairs and the tables of the fascists’ café had
been overturned except for one table on which a drunkard was lying with his head
hanging down and his mouth open and I picked up a chair and set it against one of the
pillars and mounted on it so that I could see over the heads of the crowd.
 “The man who was being pushed out by Pablo and Cuatro Dedos was Don Anastasio
Rivas, who was an undoubted fascist and the fattest man in the town. He was a grain
buyer and the agent for several insurance companies and he also loaned money at high
rates of interest. Standing on the chair, I saw him walk down the steps and toward the
lines, his fat neck bulging over the back of the collar band of his shirt, and his bald head
shining in the sun, but he never entered them because there was a shout, not as of
different men shouting, but of all of them. It was an ugly noise and was the cry of the
drunken lines all yelling together and the lines broke with the rush of men toward him
and I saw Don Anastasio throw himself down with his hands over his head and then you
could not see him for the men piled on top of him. And when the men got up from him,
Don Anastasio was dead from his head being beaten against the stone flags of the
paving of the arcade and there were no more lines but only a mob.
 “‘We’re going in,’ they commenced to shout. ‘We’re going in after them.’
 “‘He’s too heavy to carry,’ a man kicked at the body of Don Anastasio, who was lying
there on his face. ‘Let him stay there.’
 “‘Why should we lug that tub of tripe to the cliff? Let him lie there.’
 “‘We are going to enter and finish with them inside,’ a man shouted. ‘We’re going in.’
 “‘Why wait all day in the sun?’ another yelled. ‘Come on. Let us go.’
 “The mob was now pressing into the arcade. They were shouting and pushing and
they made a noise now like an animal and they were all shouting ‘Open up! Open up!’
for the guards had shut the doors of the Ayuntamiento when the lines broke.
 “Standing on the chair, I could see in through the barred window into the hail of the
Ayuntamiento and in there it was as it had been before. The priest was standing, and
“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway 68
those who were left were kneeling in a half circle around him and they were all praying.
Pablo was sitting on the big table in front of the Mayor’s chair with his shotgun slung
over his back. His legs were hanging down from the table and he was rolling a cigarette.
Cuatro Dedos was sitting in the Mayor’s chair with his feet on the table and he was
smoking a cigarette. All the guards were sitting in different chairs of the administration,
holding their guns. The key to the big door was on the table beside Pablo.
 “The mob was shouting, ‘Open up! Open up! Open up!’ as though it were a chant and
Pablo was sitting there as though he did not hear them. He said something to the priest
but I could not hear what he said for the noise of the mob.
 “The priest, as before, did not answer him but kept on praying. With many people
pushing me, I moved the chair close against the wall, shoving it ahead of me as they
shoved me from behind. I stood on the chair with my face close against the bars of the
window and held on by the bars. A man climbed on the chair too and stood with his
arms around mine, holding the wider bars.
 “‘The chair will break,’ I said to him.
 “‘What does it matter?’ he said. ‘Look at them. Look at them pray.’
 “His breath on my neck smelled like the smell of the mob, sour, like vomit on paving
stones and the smell of drunkenness, and then he put his mouth against the opening in
the bars with his head over my shoulder, and shouted, ‘Open up! Open!’ and it was as
though the mob were on my back as a devil is on your back in a dream.
 “Now the mob was pressed tight against the door so that those in front were being
crushed by all the others who were pressing and from the square a big drunkard in a
black smock with a red-and-black handkerchief around his neck, ran and threw himself
against the press of the mob and fell forward onto the pressing men and then stood up
and backed away and then ran forward again and threw himself against the backs of
those men who were pushing, shouting, ‘Long live me and long live Anarchy.’
 “As I watched, this man turned away from the crowd and went and sat down and
drank from a bottle and then, while he was sitting down, he saw Don Anastasio, who
was still lying face down on the stones, but much trampled now, and the drunkard got up
and went over to Don Anastasio and leaned over and poured out of the bottle onto the
head of Don Anastasio and onto his clothes, and then he took a matchbox out of his
pocket and lit several matches, trying to make a fire with Don Anastasio. But the wind
was blowing hard now and it blew the matches out and after a little the big drunkard sat
there by Don Anastasio, shaking his head and drinking out of the bottle and every once
in a while, leaning over and patting Don Anastasio on the shoulders of his dead body.
 “All this time the mob was shouting to open up and the man on the chair with me was
holding tight to the bars of the window and shouting to open up until it deafened me with
his voice roaring past my ear and his breath foul on me and I looked away from
watching the drunkard who had been trying to set fire to Don Anastasio and into the hall
of the Ayuntamiento again; and it was just as it had been. They were still praying as they
had been, the men all kneeling, with their shirts open, some with their heads down,
others with their heads up, looking toward the priest and toward the crucifix that he held,
and the priest praying fast and hard and looking Out over their heads, and in back of
them Pablo, with his cigarette now lighted, was sitting there on the table swinging his
legs, his shotgun slung over his back, and he was playing with the key.
 “I saw Pablo speak to the priest again, leaning forward from the table and I could not
hear what he said for the shouting. But the priest did not answer him but went on
praying. Then a man stood up from among the half circle of those who were praying and
I saw he wanted to go out. It was Don José Castro, whom every one called Don Pepe, a
confirmed fascist, and a dealer in horses, and he stood up now small, neat-looking even
unshaven and wearing a pajama top tucked into a pair of gray-striped trousers. He
kissed the crucifix and the priest blessed him and he stood up and looked at Pablo and
jerked his head toward the door.
 “Pablo shook his head and went on smoking. I could see Don Pepe say something to
Pablo but could not hear it. Pablo did not answer; he simply shook his head again and
“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway 69
nodded toward the door.
 “Then I saw Don Pepe look full at the door and realized that he had not known it was
locked. Pablo showed him the key and he Stood looking at it an instant and then he
turned and went and knelt down again. I saw the priest look around at Pablo and Pablo
grinned at him and showed him the key and the priest seemed to realize for the first time
that the door was locked and he seemed as though he started to shake his head, but he
only inclined it and went back to praying.
 “I do not know how they could not have understood the door was locked unless it was
that they were so concentrated on their praying and their own thoughts; but now they
certainly understood and they understood the shouting and they must have known now
that all was changed. But they remained the same as before.
 “By now the shouting was so that you could hear nothing and the drunkard who stood
on the chair with me shook with his hands at the bars and yelled, ‘Open up! Open up!’
until he was hoarse.
 “I watched Pablo speak to the priest again and the priest did not answer. Then I saw
Pablo unsling his shotgun and he reached over and tapped the priest on the shoulder
with it. The priest paid no attention to him and I saw Pablo shake his head. Then he
spoke over his shoulder to Cuatro Dedos and Cuatro Dedos spoke to the other guards
and they all stood up and walked back to the far end of the room and stood there with
their shotguns.
 “I saw Pablo say something to Cuatro Dedos and he moved over two tables and some
benches and the guards stood behind them with their shotguns. It made a barricade in
that corner of the room. Pablo leaned over and tapped the priest on the shoulder again
with the shotgun and the priest did not pay attention to him but I saw Don Pepe
watching him while the others paid no attention but went on praying. Pablo shook his
head and, seeing Don Pepe looking at him, he shook his head at Don Pepe and showed
him the key, holding it up in his hand. Don Pepe understood and he dropped his head
and commenced to pray very fast.
 “Pablo swung his legs down from the table and walked around it to the big chair of the
Mayor on the raised platform behind the long council table. He sat down in it and rolled
himself a cigarette, all the time watching the fascists who were praying with the priest.
You could not see any expression on his face at all. The key was on the table in front of
him. It was a big key of iron, over a foot long. Then Pablo called to the guards
something I could not hear and one guard went down to the door. I could see them all
praying faster than ever and I knew that they all knew now.
 “Pablo said something to the priest but the priest did not answer. Then Pablo leaned
forward, picked up the key and tossed it underhand to the guard at the door. The guard
caught it and Pablo smiled at him. Then the guard put the key in the door, turned it, and
pulled the door toward him, ducking behind it as the mob rushed in.
 “I saw them come in and just then the drunkard on the chair with me commenced to
shout ‘Ayee! Ayee! Ayee!’ and pushed his head forward so I could not see and then he
shouted ‘Kill them! Kill them! Club them! Kill them!’ and he pushed me aside with his two
arms and I could see nothing.
 “I hit my elbow into his belly and I said, ‘Drunkard, whose chair is this? Let me see.’
 “But he just kept shaking his hands and arms against the bars and shouting, ‘Kill them!
Club them! Club them! that’s it. Club them! Kill them! Cabrones!Cabrones!Cabrones!’
 “I hit him hard with my elbow and said, ‘Cabron! Drunkard! Let me see.’
 “Then he put both his hands on my head to push me down and so he might see better
and leaned all his weight on my head and went on shouting, ‘Club them! that’s it. Club
them!’
 “‘Club yourself,’ I said and I hit him hard where it would hurt him and it hurt him and he
dropped his hands from my head and grabbed himself and said. ‘No hay derecho,
mujer. This, woman, you have no right to do.’ And in that moment, looking through the
bars, I saw the hail full of men flailing away with clubs and striking with flails, and poking
and striking and pushing and heaving against people with the white wooden pitchforks
“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway 70
that now were red and with their tines broken, and this was going on all over the room
while Pablo sat in the big chair with his shotgun on his knees, watching, and they were
shouting and clubbing and stabbing and men were screaming as horses scream in a
fire. And I saw the priest with his skirts tucked up scrambling over a bench and those
after him were chopping at him with the sickles and the reaping hooks and then some
one had hold of his robe and there was another scream and another scream and I saw
two men chopping into his back with sickles while a third man held the skirt of his robe
and the Priest’s arms were up and he was clinging to the back of a chair and then the
chair I was standing on broke and the drunkard and I were on the pavement that
smelled of spilled wine and vomit and the drunkard was shaking his finger at me and
saying, ‘No hay derecho, mujer, no hay derecho. You could have done me an injury,’
and the people were trampling over us to get into the hall of the Ayuntamiento and all I
could see was legs of people going in the doorway and the drunkard sitting there facing
me and holding himself where I had hit him.
 “That was the end of the killing of the fascists in our town and I was glad I did not see
more of it and, but for that drunkard, I would have seen it all. So he served some good
because in the Ayuntamiento it was a thing one is sorry to have seen.
 “But the other drunkard was something rarer still. As we got up after the breaking of
the chair, and the people were still crowding into the Ayuntamiento, I saw this drunkard
of the square with his red-and-black scarf, again pouring something over Don Anastasio.
He was shaking his head from side to side and it was very hard for him to sit up, but he
was pouring and lighting matches and then pouring and lighting matches and I walked
over to him and said, ‘What are you doing, shameless?’
 “‘Nada, mujer, nada,’ he said. ‘Let me alone.’
 “And perhaps because I was standing there so that my legs made a shelter from the
wind, the match caught and a blue flame began to run up the shoulder of the coat of
Don Anastasio and onto the back of his neck and the drunkard put his head up and
shouted in a huge voice, ‘They’re burning the dead! They’re burning the dead!’
 “‘Who?’ somebody said.
 “‘Where?’ shouted some one else.
 “‘Here,’ bellowed the drunkard. ‘Exactly here!’
 “Then some one hit the drunkard a great blow alongside the head with a flail and he
fell back, and lying on the ground, he looked up at the man who had hit him and then
shut his eyes and crossed his hands on his chest, and lay there beside Don Anastasio
as though he were asleep. The man did not hit him again and he lay there and he was
still there when they picked up Don Anastasio and put him with the others in the cart that
hauled them all over to the cliff where they were thrown over that evening with the
others after there had been a cleaning up in the Ayuntamiento. It would have been
better for the town if they had thrown over twenty or thirty of the drunkards, especially
those of the red-and-black scarves, and if we ever have another revolution I believe they
should be destroyed at the start. But then we did not know this. But in the next days we
were to learn.
 “But that night we did not know what was to come. After the slaying in the
Ayuntamiento there was no more killing but we could not have a meeting that night
because there were too many drunkards. It was impossible to obtain order and so the
meeting was postponed until the next day.
 “That night I slept with Pablo. I should not say this to you, guapa, but on the other
hand, it is good for you to know everything and at least what I tell you is true. Listen to
this, Inglés. It is very curious.
 “As I say, that night we ate and it was very curious. It was as after a storm or a flood or
a battle and every one was tired and no one spoke much. I, myself, felt hollow and not
well and I was full of shame and a sense of wrongdoing and I had a great feeling of
oppression and of bad to come, as this morning after the planes. And certainly, bad
came within three days.
 “Pablo, when we ate, spoke little.
“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway 71
 “‘Did you like it, Pilar?’ he asked finally with his mouth full of roast young goat. We
were eating at the inn from where the buses leave and the room was crowded and
people were singing and there was difficulty serving.
 “‘No,’ I said. ‘Except for Don Faustino, I did not like it.’
 “‘I liked it,’ he said.
 “‘All of it?’ I asked him.
 “‘All of it,’ he said and cut himself a big piece of bread with his knife and commenced
to mop up gravy with it. ‘All of it, except the priest.’
 “‘You didn’t like it about the priest?’ because I knew he hated priests even worse than
he hated fascists.
 “‘He was a disillusionment to me,’ Pablo said sadly.
 “So many people were singing that we had to almost shout to hear one another.
 “‘Why?’
 “‘He died very badly,’ Pablo said. ‘He had very little dignity.’
 “‘How did you want him to have dignity when he was being chased by the mob?’ I
said. ‘I thought he had much dignity all the time before. All the dignity that one could
have.’
 “‘Yes,’ Pablo said. ‘But in the last minute he was frightened.’
 “‘Who wouldn’t be?’ I said. ‘Did you see what they were chasing him with?’
 “‘Why would I not see?’ Pablo said. ‘But I find he died badly.’
 “‘In such circumstances any one dies badly,’ I told him. ‘What do you want for your
money? Everything that happened in the Ayuntamiento was scabrous.’
 “‘Yes,’ said Pablo. ‘There was little organization. But a priest. He has an example to
set.’
 “‘I thought you hated priests.’
 “‘Yes,’ said Pablo and cut some more bread. ‘But a Spanish priest. A Spanish priest
should die very well.’
 “‘I think he died well enough,’ I said. ‘Being deprived of all formality.’
 “‘No,’ Pablo said. ‘To me he was a great disillusionment. All day I had waited for the
death of the priest. I had thought he would be the last to enter the lines. I awaited it with
great anticipation. I expected something of a culmination. I had never seen a priest die.’
 “‘There is time,’ I said to him sarcastically. ‘Only today did the movement start.’
 “‘No,’ he said. ‘I am disillusioned.’
 “‘Now,’ I said. ‘I suppose you will lose your faith.’
 “‘You do not understand, Pilai’ he said. ‘He was a Spanish priest.’
 “‘What people the Spaniards are,’ I said to him. And what a people they are for pride,
eh, Inglés? What a people.”
 “We must get on,” Robert Jordan said. He looked at the sun. “It’s nearly noon.”
 “Yes,” Pilar said. “We will go now. But let me tell you about Pablo. That night he said
to me, ‘Pilar, tonight we will do nothing.’
 “‘Good,’ I told him. ‘That pleases me.’
 “‘I think it would be bad taste after the killing of so many people.’
 “‘Qué va,’ I told him. ‘What a saint you are. You think I lived years with bullfighters not
to know how they are after the Corrida?’
 “‘Is it true, Pilar?’ he asked me.
 “‘When did I lie to you?’ I told him.
 “‘It is true, Pilar, I am a finished man this night. You do not reproach me?’
 “‘No, hombre,’ I said to him. ‘But don’t kill people every day, Pablo.’
 “And he slept that night like a baby and I woke him in the morning at daylight but I
could not sleep that night and I got up and sat in a chair and looked out of the window
and I could see the square in the moonlight where the lines had been and across the
square the trees shining in the moonlight, and the darkness of their shadows, and the
benches bright too in the moonlight, and the scattered bottles shining, and beyond the
edge of the cliff where they had all been thrown. And there was no sound but the
splashing of the water in the fountain and I sat there and I thought we have begun badly.
“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway 72
 “The window was open and up the square from the Fonda I could hear a woman
crying. I went out on the balcony standing there in my bare feet on the iron and the
moon shone on the faces of all the buildings of the square and the crying was coming
from the balcony of the house of Don Guillermo. It was his wife and she was on the
balcony kneeling and crying.
 “Then I went back inside the room and I sat there and I did not wish to think for that
was the worst day of my life until one other day.”
 “What was the other?” Maria asked.
 “Three days later when the fascists took the town.”
 “Do not tell me about it,” said Maria. “I do not want to hear it. This is enough. This was
too much.”
 “I told you that you should not have listened,” Pilar said. “See. I did not want you to
hear it. Now you will have bad dreams.”
 “No,” said Maria. “But I do not want to hear more.”
 “I wish you would tell me of it sometime,” Robert Jordan said.
 “I will,” Pilar said. “But it is bad for Maria.”
 “I don’t want to hear it,” Maria said pitifully. “Please, Pilar. And do not tell it if I am
there, for I might listen in spite of myself.”
 Her lips were working and Robert Jordan thought she would cry.
 “Please, Pilar, do not tell it.”
 “Do not worry, little cropped head,” Pilar said. “Do not worry. But I will tell the Inglés
sometime.”
 “But I want to be there when he is there,” Maria said. “Oh, Pilar, do not tell it at all.”
 “I will tell it when thou art working.”
 “No. No. Please. Let us not tell it at all,” Maria said.
 “It is only fair to tell it since I have told what we did,” Pilar said. “But you shall never
hear it.”
 “Are there no pleasant things to speak of?” Maria said. “Do we have to talk always of
horrors?”
 “This afternoon,” Pilar said, “thou and Inglés. The two of you can speak of what you
wish.”
 “Then that the afternoon should come,” Maria said. “That it should come flying.”
 “It will come,” Pilar told her. “It will come flying and go the same way and tomorrow will
fly, too.”
 “This afternoon,” Maria said. “This afternoon. That this afternoon should come.”
11
 As they came up, still deep in the shadow of the pines, after dropping down from the
high meadow into the wooden valley and climbing up it on a trail that paralleled the
stream and then left it to gain, steeply, the top of a rim-rock formation, a man with a
carbine stepped out from behind a tree.
 “Halt,” he said. Then, “Hola, Pilar. Who is this with thee?”
 “An Inglés,” Pilar said. “But with a Christian name—Roberto. And what an obscenity of
steepness it is to arrive here.”
 “Salud, Camarada,” the guard said to Robert Jordan and put out his hand. “Are you
well?”
 “Yes,” said Robert Jordan. “And thee?”
 “Equally,” the guard said. He was very young, with a light build, thin, rather hawknosed face, high cheekbones and gray eyes. He wore no hat, his hair was black and
shaggy and his handclasp was strong and friendly. His eyes were friendly too.
 “Hello, Maria,” he said to the girl. “You did not tire yourself?”
 “Qué va, Joaquín,” the girl said. “We have sat and talked more than we have walked.”
 “Are you the dynamiter?” Joaquín asked. “We have heard you were here.”
 “We passed the night at Pablo’s,” Robert Jordan said. “Yes, I am the dynamiter.”
“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway 73
 “We are glad to see you,” Joaquín said. “Is it for a train?”
 “Were you at the last train?” Robert Jordan asked and smiled.
 “Was I not,” Joaquín said. “That’s where we got this,” he grinned at Maria. “You are
pretty now,” he said to Maria. “Have they told thee how pretty?”
 “Shut up, Joaquín, and thank you very much,” Maria said. “You’d be pretty with a
haircut.”
 “I carried thee,” Joaquín told the girl. “I carried thee over my shoulder.”
 “As did many others,” Pilar said in the deep voice. “Who didn’t carry her? Where is the
old man?”
 “At the camp.”
 “Where was he last night?”
 “In Segovia.”
 “Did he bring news?”
 “Yes,” Joaquín said, “there is news.”
 “Good or bad?”
 “I believe bad.”
 “Did you see the planes?”
 “Ay,” said Joaquín and shook his head. “Don’t talk to me of that. Comrade Dynamiter,
what planes were those?”
 “Heinkel one eleven bombers. Heinkel and Fiat pursuit,” Robert Jordan told him.
 “What were the big ones with the low wings?”
 “Heinkel one elevens.”
 “By any names they are as bad,” Joaquín said. “But I am delaying you. I will take you
to the commander.”
 “The commander?” Pilar asked.
 Joaquín nodded seriously. “I like it better than ‘chief,” he said. “It is more military.”
 “You are militarizing heavily,” Pilar said and laughed at him.
 “No,” Joaquín said. “But I like military terms because it makes orders clearer and for
better discipline.”
 “Here is one according to thy taste, Inglés,” Pilar said. “A very serious boy.”
 “Should I carry thee?” Joaquín asked the girl and put his arm on her shoulder and
smiled in her face.
 “Once was enough,” Maria told him. “Thank you just the same.”
 “Can you remember it?” Joaquín asked her.
 “I can remember being carried,” Maria said. “By you, no. I remember the gypsy
because he dropped me so many times. But I thank thee, Joaquín, and I’ll carry thee
sometime.”
 “I can remember it well enough,” Joaquín said. “I can remember holding thy two legs
and thy belly was on my shoulder and thy head over my back and thy arms hanging
down against my back.”
 “Thou hast much memory,” Maria said and smiled at him. “I remember nothing of that.
Neither thy arms nor thy shoulders nor thy back.”
 “Do you want to know something?” Joaquín asked her.
 “What is it?”
 “I was glad thou wert hanging over my back when the shots were coming from behind
us.”
 “What a swine,” Maria said. “And was it for this the gypsy too carried me so much?”
 “For that and to hold onto thy legs.”
 “My heroes,” Maria said. “My saviors.”
 “Listen, guapa,” Pilar told her. “This boy carried thee much, and in that moment thy
legs said nothing to any one. In that moment only the bullets talked clearly. And if he
would have dropped thee he could soon have been out of range of the bullets.”
 “I have thanked him,” Maria said. “And I will carry him sometime. Allow us to joke. I do
not have to cry, do I, because he carried me?”
 “I’d have dropped thee,” Joaquín went on teasing her. “But I was afraid Pilar would
“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway 74
shoot me.”
 “I shoot no one,” Pilar said.
 “No hace falta,” Joaquín told her. “You don’t need to. You scare them to death with
your mouth.”
 “What a way to speak,” Pilar told him. “And you used to be such a polite little boy.
What did you do before the movement, little boy?”
 “Very little,” Joaquín said. “I was sixteen.”
 “But what, exactly?”
 “A few pairs of shoes from time to time.”
 “Make them?”
 “No. Shine them.”
 “Qué va,” said Pilar. “There is more to it than that.” She looked at his brown face, his
lithe build, his shock of hair, and the quick heel-and-toe way that he walked. “Why did
you fail at it?”
 “Fail at what?”
 “What? You know what. You’re growing the pigtail now.”
 “I guess it was fear,” the boy said.
 “You’ve a nice figure,” Pilar told him. “But the face isn’t much. So it was fear, was it?
You were all right at the train.”
 “I have no fear of them now,” the boy said. “None. And we have seen much worse
things and more dangerous than the bulls. It is clear no bull is as dangerous as a
machine gun. But if I were in the ring with one now I do not know if I could dominate my
legs.”
 “He wanted to be a bullfighter,” Pilar explained to Robert Jordan. “But he was afraid.”
 “Do you like the bulls, Comrade Dynamiter?” Joaquín grinned, showing white teeth.
 “Very much,” Robert Jordan said. “Very, very much.”
 “Have you seen them in Valladolid?” asked Joaquín.
 “Yes. In September at the feria.”
 “That’s my town,” Joaquín said. “What a fine town but how the buena gente, the good
people of that town, have suffered in this war.” Then, his face grave, “There they shot
my father. My mother. My brother-in-law and now my sister.”
 “What barbarians,” Robert Jordan said.
 How many times had he heard this? How many times had he watched people say it
with difficulty? How many times had he seen their eyes fill and their throats harden with
the difficulty of saying my father, or my brother, or my mother, or my sister? He could
not remember how many times he had heard them mention their dead in this way.
Nearly always they spoke as this boy did now; suddenly and apropos of the mention of
the town and always you said, “What barbarians.”
 You only heard the statement of the loss. You did not see the father fall as Pilar made
him see the fascists die in that story she had told by the stream. You knew the father
died in some courtyard, or against some wall, or in some field or orchard, or at night, in
the lights of a truck, beside some road. You had seen the lights of the car from the hills
and heard the shooting and afterwards you had come down to the road and found the
bodies. You did not see the mother shot, nor the sister, nor the brother. You heard about
it; you heard the shots; and you saw the bodies.
 Pilar had made him see it in that town.
 If that woman could only write. He would try to write it and if he had luck and could
remember it perhaps he could get it down as she told it. God, how she could tell a story.
She’s better than Quevedo, he thought. He never wrote the death of any Don Faustino
as well as she told it. I wish I could write well enough to write that story, he thought.
What we did. Not what the others did to us. He knew enough about that. He knew plenty
about that behind the lines. But you had to have known the people before. You had to
know what they had been in the village.
 Because of our mobility and because we did not have to stay afterwards to take the
punishment we never knew how anything really ended, he thought. You stayed with a
“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway 75
peasant and his family. You came at night and ate with them. In the day you were
hidden and the next night you were gone. You did your job and cleared out. The next
time you came that way you heard that they had been shot. It was as simple as that.
 But you were always gone when it happened. The partizans did their damage and
pulled out. The peasants stayed and took the punishment. I’ve always known about the
other, he thought. What we did to them at the start I’ve always known it and hated it and
I have heard it mentioned shamelessly and shamefully, bragged of, boasted of,
defended, explained and denied. But that damned woman made me see it as though I
had been there.
 Well, he thought, it is part of one’s education. It will be quite an education when it’s
finished. You learn in this war if you listen. You most certainly did. He was lucky that he
had lived parts of ten years ifl Spain before the war. They trusted you on the language,
principally. They trusted you on understanding the language completely and speaking it
idiomatically and having a knowledge of the different places. A Spaniard was only really
loyal to his village in the end. First Spain of course, then his own tribe, then his province,
then his village, his family and finally his trade. If you knew Spanish he was prejudiced
in your favor, if you knew his province it was that much better, but if you knew his village
and his trade you were in as far as any foreigner ever could be. He never felt like a
foreigner in Spanish and they did not really treat him like a foreigner most of the time;
only when they turned on you.
 Of course they turned on you. They turned on you often but they always turned on
every one. They turned on themselves, too. If you had three together, two would unite
against one, and then the two would start to betray each other. Not always, but often
enough for you to take enough cases and start to draw it as a conclusion.
 This was no way to think; but who censored his thinking? Nobody but himself. He
would not think himself into any defeatism. The first thing was to win the war. If we did
not win the war everything was lost. But he noticed, and listened to, and remembered
everything. He was serving in a war and he gave absolute loyalty and as complete a
performance as he could give while he was serving. But nobody owned his mind, nor his
faculties for seeing and hearing, and if he were going to form judgments he would form
them afterwards. And there would be plenty of material to draw them from. There was
plenty already. There was a little too much sometimes.
 Look at the Pilar woman, he thought. No matter what comes, if there is time, I must
make her tell me the rest of that story. Look at her walking along with those two kids.
You could not get three better-looking products of Spain than those. She is like a
mountain and the boy and the girl are like young trees. The old trees are all cut down
and the young trees are growing clean like that. In spite of what has happened to the
two of them they look as fresh and clean and new and untouched as though they had
never heard of misfortune. But according to Pilar, Maria has just gotten sound again.
She must have been in an awful shape.
 He remembered a Belgian boy in the Eleventh Brigade who had enlisted with five
other boys from his village. It was a village Of about two hundred people and the boy
had never been away froni the village before. When he first saw the boy, out at Hans’
Brigade Staff, the other five from the village had all been killed and the boy was in very
bad shape and they were using him as an orderly to wait on table at the staff. He had a
big, blond, ruddy Flemish face and huge awkward peasant hands and he moved, with
the dishes, as powerfully and awkwardly as a draft horse. But he cried all the time. All
during the meal he cried with no noise at all.
 You looked up and there he was, crying. If you asked for the wine, he cried and if you
passed your plate for stew, he cried; turning away his head. Then he would stop; but if
you looked up at him, tears would start coming again. Between courses he cried in the
kitchen. Every one was very gentle with him. But it did no good. He would have to find
out what became of him and whether he ever cleared up and was fit for soldiering again.
 Maria was sound enough now. She seemed so anyway. But he was no psychiatrist.
Pilar was the psychiatrist. It probably had been good for them to have been together last
“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway 76
night. Yes, unless it stopped. It certainly had been good for him. He felt fine today;
sound and good and unworried and happy. The show looked bad enough but he was
awfully lucky, too. He had been in others that announced themselves badly. Announced
themselves; that was thinking in Spanish. Maria was lovely.
 Look at her, he said to himself. Look at her.
 He looked at her striding happily in the sun; her khaki shirt open at the neck. She
walks like a colt moves, he thought. You do not run onto something like that. Such
things don’t happen. Maybe it never did happen, he thought. Maybe you dreamed it or
made it up and it never did happen. Maybe it is like the dreams you have when some
one you have seen in the cinema comes to your bed at night and is so kind and lovely.
He’d slept with them all that way When he was asleep in bed. He could remember
Garbo still, and Harlow. Yes, Harlow many times. Maybe it was like those dreams.
 But he could still remember the time Garbo came to his bed the flight before the attack
at Pozoblanco and she was wearing a soft silky wool sweater when he put his arm
around her and when she leaned forward her hair swept forward and over his face and
she said why had he never told her that he loved her when she had loved him all this
time? She was not shy, nor cold, nor distant. She was just lovely to hold and kind and
lovely and like the old days with Jack Gilbert and it was as true as though it happened
and he loved her much more than Harlow though Garbo was only there once while
Harlow—maybe this was like those dreams.
 Maybe it isn’t too, he said to himself. Maybe I could reach over and touch that Maria
now, he said to himself. Maybe you are afraid to he said to himself. Maybe you would
find out that it never happened and it was not true and it was something you made up
like those dreams about the people of the cinema or how all your old girls come back
and sleep in that robe at night on all the bare floors, in the straw of the haybarns, the
stables, the corrales and the cortijos, the woods, the garages, the trucks and all the hills
of Spain. They all came to that robe when he was asleep and they were all much nicer
than they ever had been in life. Maybe it was like that. Maybe you would be afraid to
touch her to see if it was true. Maybe you would, and probably it is something that you
made up or that you dreamed.
 He took a step across the trail and put his hand on the girl’s arm. Under his fingers he
felt the smoothness of her arm in the worn khaki. She looked at him and smiled.
 “Hello, Maria,” he said.
 “Hello, Inglés,” she answered and he saw her tawny brown face and the yellow-gray
eyes and the full lips smiling and the cropped sun-burned hair and she lifted her face at
him and smiled in his eyes. It was true all right.
 Now they were in sight of El Sordo’s camp in the last of the pines, where there was a
rounded gulch-head shaped like an upturned basin. All these limestone upper basins
must be full of caves, he thought. There are two caves there ahead. The scrub pines
growing in the rock hide them well. This is as good or a better place than Pablo’s.
 “How was this shooting of thy family?” Pilar was saying to Joaquín.
 “Nothing, woman,” Joaquín said. “They were of the left as many others in Valladolid.
When the fascists purified the town they shot first the father. He had voted Socialist.
Then they shot the mother. She had voted the same. It was the first time she had ever
voted. After that they shot the husband of one of the sisters. He was a member of the
syndicate of tramway drivers. Clearly he could not drive a tram without belonging to the
syndicate. But he was without politics. I knew him well. He was even a little hit
shameless. I do not think he was even a good comrade. Then the husband of the other
girl, the other sister, who was also in the trams, had gone to the hills as I had. They
thought she knew where he was. But she did not. So they shot her because she would
not tell them where he was.”
 “What barbarians,” said Pilar. “Where is El Sordo? I do not see him.”
 “He is here. He is probably inside,” answered Joaquín and stopping now, and resting
the rifle butt on the ground, said, “Pilar, listen to me. And thou, Maria. Forgive me if I
have molested you speaking of things of the family. I know that all have the same
“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway 77
troubles and it is more valuable not to speak of them.”
 “That you should speak,” Pilar said. “For what are we born if not to aid one another?
And to listen and say nothing is a cold enough aid.”
 “But it can molest the Maria. She has too many things of her own.”
 “Qué va,” Maria said. “Mine are such a big bucket that yours falling in will never fill it. I
am sorry, Joaquín, and I hope thy sister is well.”
 “So far she’s all right,” Joaquín said. “They have her in prison and it seems they do not
mistreat her much.”
 “Are there others in the family?” Robert Jordan asked.
 “No,” the boy said. “Me. Nothing more. Except the brother-inlaw who went to the hills
and I think he is dead.”
 “Maybe he is all right,” Maria said. “Maybe he is with a band in other mountains.”
 “For me he is dead,” Joaquín said. “He was never too good at getting about and he
was conductor of a tram and that is not the best preparation for the hills. I doubt if he
could last a year. He was Somewhat weak in the chest too.”
 “But he may be all right,” Maria put her arm on his shoulder.
 “Certainly, girl. Why not?” said Joaquín.
 As the boy stood there, Maria reached up, put her arms around his neck and kissed
him. Joaquín turned his head away because he was crying.
 “That is as a brother,” Maria said to him. “I kiss thee as a brother.”
 The boy shook his head, crying without making any noise.
 “I am thy sister,” Maria said. “And I love thee and thou hast a family. We are all thy
family.”
 “Including the Inglés,” boomed Pilar. “Isn’t it true, Inglés?”
 “Yes,” Robert Jordan said to the boy, “we are all thy family, Joaquín.”
 “He’s your brother,” Pilar said. “Hey Inglés? ”
 Robert Jordan put his arm around the boy’s shoulder. “We are all brothers,” he said.
The boy shook his head.
 “I am ashamed to have spoken,” he said. “To speak of such things makes it more
difficult for all. I am ashamed of molesting you.”
 “I obscenity in the milk of my shame,” Pilar said in her deep lovely voice. “And if the
Maria kisses thee again I will commence kissing thee myself. It’s years since I’ve kissed
a bullfighter, even an unsuccessful one like thee, I would like to kiss an unsuccessful
bullfighter turned Communist. Hold him, Inglés, till I get a good kiss at him.”
 “Deja,” the boy said and turned away sharply. “Leave me alone. I am all right and I am
ashamed.”
 He stood there, getting his face under control. Maria put her hand in Robert Jordan’s.
Pilar stood with her hands on her hips looking at the boy mockingly now.
 “When I kiss thee,” she said to him, “it will not be as any sister. This trick of kissing as
a sister.”
 “It is not necessary to joke,” the boy said. “I told you I am all right, I am sorry that I
spoke.”
 “Well then let us go and see the old man,” Pilar said. “I tire myself with such emotion.”
 The boy looked at her. From his eyes you could see he was suddenly very hurt.
 “Not thy emotion,” Pilar said to him. “Mine. What a tender thing thou art for a
bullfighter.”
 “I was a failure,” Joaquín said. “You don’t have to keep insisting on it.”
 “But you are growing the pigtail another time.”
 “Yes, and why not? Fighting stock serves best for that purpose economically. It gives
employment to many and the State will control it. And perhaps now I would not be
afraid.”
 “Perhaps not,” Pilar said. “Perhaps not.”
 “Why do you speak in such a brutal manner, Pilar?” Maria said to her. “I love thee very
much but thou art acting very barbarous.”
 “It is possible that I am barbarous,” Pilar said. “Listen, Inglés. Do you know what you
“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway 78
are going to say to El Sordo?”
 “Yes.”
 “Because he is a man of few words unlike me and thee and this sentimental
menagerie.”
 “Why do you talk thus?” Maria asked again, angrily.
 “I don’t know,” said Pilar as she strode along. “Why do you think?”
 “I do not know.”
 “At times many things tire me,” Pilar said angrily. “You understand? And one of them
is to have forty-eight years. You hear me? Forty-eight years and an ugly face. And
another is to see panic in the face of a failed bullfighter of Communist tendencies when I
say, as a joke, I might kiss him.”
 “It’s not true, Pilar,” the boy said. “You did not see that.”
 “Qué va, it’s not true. And I obscenity in the milk of all of you. Ah, there he is. Hola,
Santiago! Qué tal?”
 The man to whom Pilar spoke was short and heavy, brownfaced, with broad
cheekbones; gray haired, with wide-set yellowbrown eyes, a thin-bridged, hooked nose
like an Indian’s, a long Upper lip and a wide, thin mouth. He was clean shaven and he
walked toward them from the mouth of the cave, moving with the bow-legged walk that
went with his cattle herdsman’s breeches and boots. The day was warm but he had on a
sheep’s-wool-lined short leather jacket buttoned up to the neck. He put out a big brown
hand toPilar. “Hola, woman,” he said. “Hola,” he said to Robert Jordan and shook his
hand and looked him keenly in the face. Robert Jordan saw his eyes were yellow as a
cat’s and flat as reptile’s eyes are. “Guapa,” he said to Maria and patted her shoulder.
 “Eaten?” he asked Pilar. She shook her head.
 “Eat,” he said and looked at Robert Jordan. “Drink?” he asked, making a motion with
his hand decanting his thumb downward.
 “Yes, thanks.”
 “Good,” El Sordo said. “Whiskey?”
 “You have whiskey?”
 El Sordo nodded. “Inglés?” he asked. “Not Ruso?”
 “Americano.”
 “Few Americans here,” he said.
 “Now more.”
 “Less bad. North or South?”
 “North.”
 “Same as Inglés. When blow bridge?”
 “You know about the bridge?”
 El Sordo nodded.
 “Day after tomorrow morning.”
 “Good,” said El Sordo.
 “Pablo?” he asked Pilar.
 She shook her head. El Sordo grinned.
 “Go away,” he said to Maria and grinned again. “Come back,” he looked at a large
watch he pulled out on a leather thong from inside his coat. “Half an hour.”
 He motioned to them to sit down on a flattened log that served as a bench and looking
at Joaquín, jerked his thumb down the trail in the direction they had come from.
 “I’ll walk down with Joaquín and come back,” Maria said.
 El Sordo went into the cave and came out with a pinch bottle of Scotch whiskey and
three glasses. The bottle was under one arm, and three glasses were in the hand of that
arm, a finger in each glass, and his other hand was around the neck of an earthenware
jar of water. He put the glasses and the bottle down on the log and set the jug on the
ground.
 “No ice,” he said to Robert Jordan and handed him the bottle.
 “I don’t want any,” Pilar said and covered her glass with her hand.
 “Ice last night on ground,” El Sordo said and grinned. “All melt. Ice up there,” El Sordo
“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway 79
said and pointed to the snow that showed on the bare crest of the mountains. “Too far.”
 Robert Jordan started to pour into El Sordo’s glass but the deaf man shook his head
and made a motion for the other to pour for himself.
 Robert Jordan poured a big drink of Scotch into the glass and El Sordo watched him
eagerly and when he had finished, handed him the water jug and Robert Jordan filled
the glass with the cold water that ran in a stream from the earthenware spout as he
tipped up the jug.
 El Sordo poured himself half a glassful of whiskey and filled the glass with water.
 “Wine?” he asked Pilar.
 “No. Water.”
 “Take it,” he said. “No good,” he said to Robert Jordan and grinned. “Knew many
English. Always much whiskey.”
 “Where?”
 “Ranch,” El Sordo said. “Friends of boss.”
 “Where do you get the whiskey?”
 “What?” he could not hear.
 “You have to shout,” Pilar said. “Into the other ear.”
 El Sordo pointed to his better ear and grinned.
 “Where do you get the whiskey?” Robert Jordan shouted.
 “Make it,” El Sordo said and watched Robert Jordan’s hand check on its way to his
mouth with the glass.
 “No,” El Sordo said and patted his shoulder. “Joke. Comes from La Granja. Heard last
night comes English dynamiter. Good. Very happy. Get whiskey. For you. You like?”
 “Very much,” said Robert Jordan. “It’s very good whiskey.”
 “Am contented,” Sordo grinned. “Was bringing tonight with information”
 “What information?”
 Much troop movement.”
 Where?
 “Segovia. Planes you saw.”
 “Yes.”
 “Bad, eh?”
 “Bad.”
 “Troop movement?”
 “Much between Villacastín and Segovia. On Valladolid road. Much between Villacastín
and San Rafael. Much. Much.”
 “What do you think?”
 “We prepare something?”
 “Possibly.”
 “They know. Prepare too.”
 “It is possible.”
 “Why not blow bridge tonight?”
 “Orders.”
 “Whose orders?”
 “General Staff.”
 “So.”
 “Is the time of the blowing important?” Pilar asked.
 “Of all importance.”
 “But if they are moving up troops?”
 “I will send Anselmo with a report of all movement and concentrations. He is checking
the road.”
 “You have some one at road?” Sordo asked.
 Robert Jordan did not know how much he had heard. You never know with a deaf
man.
 “Yes,” he said.
 “Me, too. Why not blow bridge now?”
“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway 80
 “I have my orders.”
 “I don’t like it,” El Sordo said. “This I do not like.”
 “Nor I,” said Robert Jordan.
 El Sordo shook his head and took a sip of the whiskey. “You want of me?”
 “How many men have you?”
 “Eight.”
 “To cut the telephone, attack the post at the house of the roadmenders, take it, and fall
back on the bridge.”
 “It is easy.”
 “It will all be written out.”
 “Don’t trouble. And Pablo?”
 “Will cut the telephone below, attack the post at the sawmill, take it and fall back on
the bridge.”
 “And afterwards for the retreat?” Pilar asked. “We are seven men, two women and five
horses. You are,” she shouted into Sordo’s ear.
 “Eight men and four horses. Faltan caballos,” he said. “Lacks horses.”
 “Seventeen people and nine horses,” Pilar said. “Without accounting for transport.”
 Sordo said nothing.
 “There is no way of getting horses?” Robert Jordan said into Sordo’s best ear.
 “In war a year,” Sordo said. “Have four.” He showed four fingers. “Now you want eight
for tomorrow.”
 “Yes,” said Robert Jordan. “Knowing you are leaving. Having no need to be careful as
you have been in this neighborhood. Not having to be cautious here now. You could not
cut out and steal eight head of horses?”
 “Maybe,” Sordo said. “Maybe none. Maybe more.”
 “You have an automatic rifle?” Robert Jordan asked.
 Sordo nodded.
 “Where?”
 “Up the hill.”
 “What kind?”
 “Don’t know name. With pans.”
 “How many rounds?”
 “Five pans.”
 “Does any one know how to use it?”
 “Me. A little. Not shoot too much. Not want make noise here. Not want use cartridges.”
 “I will look at it afterwards,” Robert Jordan said. “Have you hand grenades?”
 Plenty.
 “How many rounds per rifle?”
 “Plenty.”
 “How many?”
 “One hundred fifty. More maybe.”
 “What about other people?”
 “For what?”
 “To have sufficient force to take the posts and cover the bridge While I am blowing it.
We should have double what we have.”
 “Take posts don’t worry. What time day?”
 “Daylight.”
 “Don’t worry.”
 “I could use twenty more men, to be sure,” Robert Jordan said.
 “Good ones do not exist. You want undependables?”
 “No. How many good ones?”
 “Maybe four.”
 “Why so few?”
 “No trust.”
 “For horseholders?”
“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway 81
 “Must trust much to be horseholders.”
 “I’d like ten more good men if I could get them.”
 “Four.”
 “Anselmo told me there were over a hundred here in these hills.”
 “No good.”
 “You said thirty,” Robert Jordan said to Pilar. “Thirty of a certain degree of
dependability.”
 “What about the people of Elias?” Pilar shouted to Sordo. He shook his head.
 “No good.”
 “You can’t get ten?” Robert Jordan asked. Sordo looked at him with his flat, yellow
eyes and shook his head.
 “Four,” he said and held up four fingers.
 “Yours are good?” Robert Jordan asked, regretting it as he said it.
 Sordo nodded.
 “Dentro de la gravedad,” he said in Spanish. “Within the limits of the danger.” He
grinned. “Will be bad, eh?”
 “Possibly.”
 “Is the same to me,” Sordo said simply and not boasting. “Better four good than much
bad. In this war always much bad, very little good. Every day fewer good. And Pablo?”
he looked at Pilar.
 “As you know,” Pilar said. “Worse every day.”
 Sordo shrugged his shoulders.
 “Take drink,” Sordo said to Robert Jordan. “I bring mine and four more. Makes twelve.
Tonight we discuss all. I have sixty sticks dynamite. You want?”
 “What per cent?”
 “Don’t know. Common dynamite. I bring.”
 “We’ll blow the small bridge above with that,” Robert Jordan said. “That is fine. You’ll
come down tonight? Bring that, will you? I’ve no orders for that but it should be blown.”
 “I come tonight. Then hunt horses.”
 “What chance for horses?”
 “Maybe. Now eat.”
 Does he talk that way to every one? Robert Jordan thought. Or is that his idea of how
to make foreigners understand?
 “And where are we going to go when this is done?” Pilar shouted into Sordo’s ear.
 He shrugged his shoulders.
 “All that must be arranged,” the woman said.
 “Of course,” said Sordo. “Why not?”
 “It is bad enough,” Pilar said. “It must be planned very well.”
 “Yes, woman,” Sordo said. “What has thee worried?”
 “Everything,” Pilar shouted.
 Sordo grinned at her.
 “You’ve been going about with Pablo,” he said.
 So he does only speak that pidgin Spanish for foreigners, Robert Jordan thought.
Good. I’m glad to hear him talking straight.
 “Where do you think we should go?” Pilar asked.
 “Where?”
 “Yes, where?”
 “There are many places,” Sordo said. “Many places. You know Gredos?”
 “There are many people there. All these places will be cleaned up as soon as they
have time.”
 “Yes. But it is a big country and very wild.”
 “It would be very difficult to get there,” Pilar said.
 “Everything is difficult,” El Sordo said. “We can get to Gredos as well as to anywhere
else. Travelling at night. Here it is very dangerous now. It is a miracle we have been
here this long. Gredos is safer country than this.”
“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway 82
 “Do you know where I want to go?” Pilar asked him.
 “Where? The Paramera? That’s no good.”
 “No,” Pilar said. “Not the Sierra de Paramera. I want to go to the Republic.”
 “That is possible.”
 “Would your people go?”
 “Yes. If I say to.”
 “Of mine, I do not know,” Pilar said. “Pablo would not want to although, truly, he might
feel safer there. He is too old to have to go for a soldier unless they call more classes.
The gypsy will not wish to go. I do not know about the others.”
 “Because nothing passes her for so long they do not realize the danger,” El Sordo
said.
 “Since the planes today they will see it more,” Robert Jordan said. “But I should think
you could operate very well from the Gredos.”
 “What?” El Sordo said and looked at him with his eyes very flat. There was no
friendliness in the way he asked the question.
 “You could raid more effectively from there,” Robert Jordan said.
 “So,” El Sordo said. “You know Gredos?”
 “Yes. You could operate against the main line of the railway from there. You could
keep cutting it as we are doing farther south in Estremadura. To operate from there
would be better than returning to the Republic,” Robert Jordan said. “You are more
useful there.”
 They had both gotten sullen as he talked.
 Sordo looked at Pilar and she looked back at him.
 “You know Gredos?” Sordo asked. “Truly?”
 “Sure,” said Robert Jordan.
 “Where would you go?”
 “Above Barco de Avila. Better places than here. Raid against the main road and the
railroad between Béjar and Plasencia.”
 “Very difficult,” Sordo said.
 “We have worked against that same railroad in much more dangerous country in
Estremadura,” Robert Jordan said.
 “Who is we?”
 “The guerrilleros group of Estremadura.”
 “You are many?”
 “About forty.”
 “Was the one with the bad nerves and the strange name from there?” asked Pilar.
 “Yes.”
 “Where is he now?”
 “Dead, as I told you.”
 “You are from there, too?”
 “Yes.”
 “You see what I mean?” Pilar said to him.
 And I have made a mistake, Robert Jordan thought to himself. I have told Spaniards
we can do something better than they can when the rule is never to speak of your own
exploits or abilities. When I should have flattered them I have told them what I think they
should do and now they are furious. Well, they will either get over it or they will not. They
are certainly much more useful in the Gredos than here. The proof is that here they
have done nothing since the train that Kashkin organized. It was not much of a show. It
cost the fascists one engine and killed a few troops but they all talk as though it were the
high point of the war. Maybe they will shame into going to the Gredos. Yes and maybe I
will get thrown out of here too. Well, it is not a very rosy-looking dish anyway that you
look into it.
 “Listen Inglés,” Pilar said to him. “How are your nerves?”
 “All right,” said Robert Jordan. “O.K.”
 “Because the last dynamiter they sent to work with us, although a formidable
“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway 83
technician, was very nervous.”
 “We have nervous ones,” Robert Jordan said.
 “I do not say that he was a coward because he comported himself very well,” Pilar
went on. “But he spoke in a very rare and windy way.” She raised her voice. “Isn’t it true,
Santiago, that the last dynamiter, he of the train, was a little rare?”
 “Algo raro,” the deaf man nodded and his eyes went over Robert Jordan’s face in a
way that reminded him of the round opening at the end of the wand of a vacuum
cleaner. “Si, algo raro, pero bueno.”
 “Murió,” Robert Jordan said into the deaf man’s ear. “He is dead.”
 “How was that?” the deaf man asked, dropping his eyes down from Robert Jordan’s
eyes to his lips.
 “I shot him,” Robert Jordan said. “He was too badly wounded to travel and I shot him.”
 “He was always talking of such a necessity,” Pilar said. “It was his obsession.”
 “Yes,” said Robert Jordan. “He was always talking of such a necessity and it was his
obsession.”
 “Como fué?” the deaf man asked. “Was it a train?”
 “It was returning from a train,” Robert Jordan said. “The train was successful.
Returning in the dark we encountered a fascist patrol and as we ran he was shot high in
the back but without hitting any bone except the shoulder blade. He travelled quite a
long way, but with the wound was unable to travel more. He was unwilling to be left
behind and I shot him.”
 “Menos mal,” said El Sordo. “Less bad.”
 “Are you sure your nerves are all right?” Pilar said to Robert Jordan.
 “Yes,” he told her. “I am sure that my nerves are all right and I think that when we
terminate this of the bridge you would do well to go to the Gredos.”
 As he said that, the woman started to curse in a flood of obscene invective that rolled
over and around him like the hot white water splashing down from the sudden eruption
of a geyser.
 The deaf man shook his head at Robert Jordan and grinned in delight. He continued
to shake his head happily as Pilar went on vilifying and Robert Jordan knew that it was
all right again now. Finally she stopped cursing, reached for the water jug, tipped it up
and took a drink and said, calmly, “Then just shut up about what we are to do
afterwards, will you, Inglés? You go back to the Republic and you take your piece with
you and leave us others alone here to decide what part of these hills we’ll die in.”
 “Live in,” El Sordo said. “Calm thyself, Pilar.”
 “Live in and die in,” Pilar said. “I can see the end of it well enough. I like thee, Inglés,
but keep thy mouth off of what we must do when thy business is finished.”
 “It is thy business,” Robert Jordan said. “I do not put my hand in it.”
 “But you did,” Pilar said. “Take thy little cropped-headed whore and go back to the
Republic but do not shut the door on others who are not foreigners and who loved the
Republic when thou wert wiping thy mother’s milk off thy chin.”
 Maria had come up the trail while they were talking and she heard this last sentence
which Pilar, raising her voice again, shouted at Robert Jordan. Maria shook her head at
Robert Jordan violently and shook her finger warningly. Pilar saw Robert Jordan looking
at the girl and saw him smile and she turned and said, “Yes. I said whore and I mean it.
And I suppose that you’ll go to Valencia together and we can eat goat crut in Gredos.”
 “I’m a whore if thee wishes, Pilar,” Maria said. “I suppose I am in all case if you say so.
But calm thyself. What passes with thee?”
 “Nothing,” Pilar said and sat down on the bench, her voice calm now and all the
metallic rage gone out of it. “I do not call thee that. But I have such a desire to go to the
Republic.”
 “We can all go,” Maria said.
 “Why not?” Robert Jordan said. “Since thou seemest not to love the Gredos.”
 Sordo grinned at him.
 “We’ll see,” Pilar said, her rage gone now. “Give me a glass of that rare drink. I have
“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway 84
worn my throat out with anger. We’ll see. We’ll see what happens.”
 “You see, Comrade,” El Sordo explained. “It is the morning that is difficult.” He was not
talking the pidgin Spanish now and he was looking into Robert Jordan’s eyes calmly and
explainingly; not searchingly nor suspiciously, nor with the flat superiority of the old
campaigner that had been in them before. “I understand your needs and I know the
posts must be exterminated and the bridge covered while you do your work. This I
understand perfectly. This is easy to do before daylight or at daylight.”
 “Yes,” Robert Jordan said. “Run along a minute, will you?” he said to Maria without
looking at her.
 The girl walked away out of hearing and sat down, her hands clasped over her ankles.
 “You see,” Sordo said. “In that there is no problem. But to leave afterward and get out
of this country in daylight presents a grave problem”
 “Clearly,” said Robert Jordan. “I have thought of it. It is daylight for me also.”
 “But you are one,” El Sordo said. “We are various.”
 “There is the possibility of returning to the camps and leaving from there at dark,” Pilar
said, putting the glass to her lips and then lowering it.
 “That is very dangerous, too,” El Sordo explained. “That is perhaps even more
dangerous.”
 “I can see how it would be,” Robert Jordan said.
 “To do the bridge in the night would be easy,” El Sordo said. “Since you make the
condition that it must be done at daylight, it brings grave consequences.”
 “I know it.”
 “You could not do it at night?”
 “I would be shot for it.”
 “It is very possible we will all be shot for it if you do it in the daytime.”
 “For me myself that is less important once the bridge is blown,” Robert Jordan said.
“But I see your viewpoint. You cannot work Out a retreat for daylight?”
 “Certainly,” El Sordo said. “We will work out such a retreat. But I explain to you why
one is preoccupied and why one is irritated. You speak of going to Gredos as though it
were a military manceuvre to be accomplished. To arrive at Gredos would be a miracle.”
 Robert Jordan said nothing.
 “Listen to me,” the deaf man said. “I am speaking much. But it is so we may
understand one another. We exist here by a miracle. By a mixacle of laziness and
stupidity of the fascists which they will remedy in time. Of course we are very careful
and we make no disturbance in these hills.”
 “I know.”
 “But now, with this, we must go. We must think much about the manner of our going.”
 “Clearly.”
 “Then,” said El Sordo. “Let us eat now. I have talked much.”
 “Never have I heard thee talk so much,” Pilar said. “Is it this?” she held up the glass.
 “No,” El Sordo shook his head. “It isn’t whiskey. It is that never have I had so much to
talk of.”
 “I appreciate your aid and your loyalty,” Robert Jordan said. “I appreciate the difficulty
caused by the timing of the blowing of the bridge.”
 “Don’t talk of that,” El Sordo said. “We are here to do what we can do. But this is
complicated.”
 “And on paper very simple,” Robert Jordan grinned. “On paper the bridge is blown at
the moment the attack starts in order that nothing shall come up the road. It is very
simple.”
 “That they should let us do something on paper,” El Sordo said. “That we should
conceive and execute something on paper.”
 “Paper bleeds little,” Robert Jordan quoted the proverb.
 “But it is very useful,” Pilar said. “Es muy util. What I would like to do is use thy orders
for that purpose.”
 “Me too,” said Robert Jordan. “But you could never win a war like that.”
“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway 85
 “No,” the big woman said. “I suppose not. But do you know what I would like?”
 “To go to the Republic,” El Sordo said. He had put his good ear close to her as she
spoke. “Ya irás, mujer. Let us win this and it will all be Republic.”
 “All right,” Pilar said. “And now, for God’s sake let us eat.”
12
 They left El Sordo’s after eating and started down the trail. El Sordo had walked with
them as far as the lower post.
 “Salud,” he said. “Until tonight.”
 “Salud, Camarada,” Robert Jordan had said to him and the three of them had gone on
down the trail, the deaf man standing looking after them. Maria had turned and waved
her hand at him and El Sordo waved disparagingly with the abrupt, Spanish upward flick
of the forearm as though something were being tossed away which seems the negation
of all salutation which has not to do with business. Through the meal he had never
unbuttoned his sheepskin coat and he had been carefully polite, careful to turn his head
to hear and had returned to speaking his broken Spanish, asking Robert Jordan about
conditions in the Republic politely; but it was obvious he wanted to be rid of them.
 As they had left him, Pilar had said to him, “Well, Santiago?”
 “Well, nothing, woman,” the deaf man said. “It is all right. But I am thinking.”
 “Me, too,” Pilar had said and now as they walked down the trail, the walking easy and
pleasant down the steep trail through the pines that they had toiled up, Pilar said
nothing. Neither Robert Jordan nor Maria spoke and the three of them travelled along
fast until the trail rose steeply out of the wooded valley to come up through the timber,
leave it, and come out into the high meadow.
 It was hot in the late May afternoon and halfway up this last steep grade the woman
stopped. Robert Jordan, stopping and looking back, saw the sweat beading on her
forehead. He thought her brown face looked pallid and the skin sallow and that there
were dark areas under her eyes.
 “Let us rest a minute,” he said. “We go too fast.”
 “No,” she said. “Let us go on.”
 “Rest, Pilar,” Maria said. “You look badly.”
 “Shut up,” the woman said. “Nobody asked for thy advice.”
 She started on up the trail but at the top she was breathing heavily and her face was
wet with perspiration and there was no doubt about her pallor now.
 “Sit down, Pilar,” Maria said. “Please, please sit down.”
 “All right,” said Pilar and the three of them sat down under a pine tree and looked
across the mountain meadow to where the tops of the peaks seemed to jut out from the
roll of the high country with snow shining bright on them now in the early afternoon sun.
 “What rotten stuff is the snow and how beautiful it looks,” Pilar said. “What an illusion
is the snow.” She turned to Maria. “I am sorry I was rude to thee, guapa. I don’t know
what has held me today. I have an evil temper.”
 “I never mind what you say when you are angry,” Maria told her. “And you are angry
often.”
 “Nay, it is worse than anger,” Pilar said, looking across at the peaks.
 “Thou art not well,” Maria said.
 “Neither is it that,” the woman said. “Come here, guapa, and put thy head in my lap.”
 Maria moved close to her, put her arms out and folded them as One does who goes to
sleep without a pillow and lay with her head on her arms. She turned her face up at Pilar
and smiled at her but the big woman looked on across the meadow at the mountains.
She stroked the girl’s head without looking down at her and ran a blunt finger across the
girl’s forehead and then around the line of her ear and down the line where the hair grew
on her neck.
 “You can have her in a little while, Inglés,” she said. Robert Jordan was sitting behind
her.
“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway 86
 “Do not talk like that,” Maria said.
 “Yes, he can have thee,” Pilar said and looked at neither of them. “I have never
wanted thee. But I am jealous.”
 “Pilar,” Maria said. “Do not talk thus.”
 “He can have thee,” Pilar said and ran her finger around the lobe of the girl’s ear. “But
I am very jealous.”
 “But Pilar,” Maria said. “It was thee explained to me there was nothing like that
between us.”
 “There is always something like that,” the woman said. “There is always something
like something that there should not be. But with me there is not. Truly there is not. I
want thy happiness and nothing more.”
 Maria said nothing but lay there, trying to make her head rest lightly.
 “Listen, guapa,” said Pilar and ran her finger now absently but tracingly over the
contours of her cheeks. “Listen, guapa, I love thee and he can have thee, I am no
tortillera but a woman made for men. That is true. But now it gives me pleasure to say
thus, in the daytime, that I care for thee.”
 “I love thee, too.”
 “Qué va. Do not talk nonsense. Thou dost not know even of what I speak.”
 “I know.”
 “Qué va, that you know. You are for the Inglés. That is seen and as it should be. That I
would have. Anything else I would not have. I do not make perversions. I only tell you
something true. Few people will ever talk to thee truly and no women. I am jealous and
say it and it is there. And I say it.”
 “Do not say it,” Maria said. “Do not say it, Pilar.”
 “Por qué, do not say it,” the woman said, still not looking at either of them. “I will say it
until it no longer pleases me to say it. And,” she looked down at the girl now, “that time
has come already. I do not say it more, you understand?”
 “Pilar,” Maria said. “Do not talk thus.”
 “Thou art a very pleasant little rabbit,” Pilar said. “And lift thy head now because this
silliness is over.”
 “It was not silly,” said Maria. “And my head is well where it is.”
 “Nay. Lift it,” Pilar told her and put her big hands under the girl’s head and raised it.
“And thou, Inglés?” she said, still holding the girl’s head as she looked across at the
mountains. “What cat has eaten thy tongue?”
 “No cat,” Robert Jordan said.
 “What animal then?” She laid the girl’s head down on the ground.
 “No animal,” Robert Jordan told her.
 “You swallowed it yourself, eh?”
 “I guess so,” Robert Jordan said.
 “And did you like the taste?” Pilar turned now and grinned at him.
 “Not much.”
 “I thought not,” Pilar said. “I thought not. But I give you back our rabbit. Nor ever did I
try to take your rabbit. That’s a good name for her. I heard you call her that this
morning.”
 Robert Jordan felt his face redden.
 “You are a very hard woman,” he told her.
 “No,” Pilar said. “But so simple I am very complicated. Are you very complicated,
Inglés?”
 “No. Nor not so simple.”
 “You please me, Inglés,” Pilar said. Then she smiled and leaned forward and smiled
and shook her head. “Now if I could take the rabbit from thee and take thee from the
rabbit.”
 “You could not.”
 “I know it,” Pilar said and smiled again. “Nor would I wish to. But when I was young I
could have.”
“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway 87
 “I believe it.”
 “You believe it?”
 “Surely,” Robert Jordan said. “But such talk is nonsense.”
 “It is not like thee,” Maria said.
 “I am not much like myself today,” Pilar said. “Very little like myself. Thy bridge has
given me a headache, Inglés.”
 “We can tell it the Headache Bridge,” Robert Jordan said. “But I will drop it in that
gorge like a broken bird cage.”
 “Good,” said Pilar. “Keep on talking like that.”
 “I’ll drop it as you break a banana from which you have removed the skin.”
 “I could eat a banana now,” said Pilar. “Go on, Inglés. Keep on talking largely.”
 “There is no need,” Robert Jordan said. “Let us get to camp.”
 “Thy duty,” Pilar said. “It will come quickly enough. I said that I would leave the two of
you.”
 “No. I have much to do.”
 “That is much too and does not take long.”
 “Shut thy mouth, Pilar,” Maria said. “You speak grossly.”
 “I am gross,” Pilar said. “But I am also very delicate. Soy muy delicada. I will leave the
two of you. And the talk of jealousness is nonsense. I was angry at Joaquín because I
saw from his look how ugly I am. I am only jealous that you are nineteen. It is not a
jealousy which lasts. You will not be nineteen always. Now I go.”
 She stood up and with a hand on one hip looked at Robert Jordan, who was also
standing. Maria sat on the ground under the tree, her head dropped forward.
 “Let us all go to camp together,” Robert Jordan said. “It is better and there is much to
do.”
 Pilar nodded with her head toward Maria, who sat there, her head turned away from
them, saying nothing.
 Pilar smiled and shrugged her shoulders almost imperceptibly and said, “You know
the way?”
 “I know it,” Maria said, not raising her head.
 “Pues me voy,” Pilar said. “Then I am going. We’ll have something hearty for you to
eat, Inglés.”
 She started to walk off into the heather of the meadow toward the stream that led
down through it toward the camp.
 “Wait,” Robert Jordan called to her. “It is better that we should all go together.”
 Maria sat there and said nothing.
 Pilar did not turn.
 “Qué va, go together,” she said. “I will see thee at the camp.”
 Robert Jordan stood there.
 “Is she all right?” he asked Maria. “She looked ill before.”
 “Let her go,” Maria said, her head still down.
 “I think I should go with her.”
 “Let her go,” said Maria. “Let her go!”
 They were walking through the heather of the mountain meadow and Robert Jordan
felt the brushing of the heather against his legs, felt the weight of his pistol in its holster
against his thigh, felt the sun on his head, felt the breeze from the snow of the mountain
peaks cool on his back and, in his hand, he felt the girl’s hand firm and strong, the
fingers locked in his. From it, from the palm of her hand against the palm of his, from
their fingers locked together, and from her wrist across his wrist something came from
her hand, her fingers and her wrist to his that was as fresh as the first light air that
moving toward you over the sea barely wrinkles the glassy surface of a calm, as light as
a feather moved across one’s lip, or a leaf falling when there is no breeze; so light that it
could be felt with the touch of their fingers alone, but that was so strengthened, so
intensified, and made so urgent, so aching and so strong by the hard pressure of their
fingers and the close pressed palm and wrist, that it was as though a current moved up
“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway 88
his arm and filled his whole body with an aching hollowness of wanting. With the sun
shining on her hair, tawny as wheat, and on her gold-brown smooth-lovely face and on
the curve of her throat he bent her head back and held her to him and kissed her. He felt
her trembling as he kissed her and he held the length of her body tight to him and felt
her breasts against his chest through the two khaki shirts, he felt them small and firm
and he reached and undid the buttons on her shirt and bent and kissed her and she
stood shivering, holding her head back, his arm behind her. Then she dropped her chin
to his head and then he felt her hands holding his head and rocking it against her. He
straightened and with his two arms around her held her so tightly that she was lifted off
the ground, tight against him, and he felt her trembling and then her lips were on his
throat, and then he put her down and said, “Maria, oh, my Maria.”
 Then he said, “Where should we go?”
 She did not say anything but slipped her hand inside of his shirt and he felt her
undoing the shirt buttons and she said, “You, too. I want to kiss, too.”
 “No, little rabbit.”
 “Yes. Yes. Everything as you.”
 “Nay. That is an impossibility.”
 “Well, then. Oh, then. Oh, then. Oh.”
 Then there was the smell of heather crushed and the roughness of the bent stalks
under her head and the sun bright on her closed eyes and all his life he would
remember the curve of her throat with her head pushed back into the heather roots and
her lips that moved smally and by themselves and the fluttering of the lashes on the
eyes tight closed against the sun and against everything, and for her everything was
red, orange, gold-red from the sun on the closed eyes, and it all was that color, all of it,
the filling, the possessing, the having, all of that color, all in a blindness of that color. For
him it was a dark passage which led to nowhere, then to nowhere, then again to
nowhere, once again to nowhere, always and forever to nowhere, heavy on the elbows
in the earth to nowhere, dark, never any end to nowhere, hung on all time always to
unknowing nowhere, this time and again for always to nowhere, now not to be borne
once again always and to nowhere, now beyond all bearing up, up, up and into
nowhere, suddenly, scaldingly, holdingly all nowhere gone and time absolutely still and
they were both there, time having stopped and he felt the earth move out and away from
under them.
 Then he was lying on his side, his head deep in the heather, smelling it and the smell
of the roots and the earth and the sun came through it and it was scratchy on his bare
shoulders and along his flanks and the girl was lying opposite him with her eyes still shut
and then she opened them and smiled at him and he said very tiredly and from a great
but friendly distance, “Hello, rabbit.” And she smiled and from no distance said, “Hello,
my Inglés.”
 “I’m not an Inglés,” he said very lazily.
 “Oh yes, you are,” she said. “You’re my Inglés,” and reached and took hold of both his
ears and kissed him on the forehead.
 “There,” she said. “How is that? Do I kiss thee better?”
 Then they were walking along the stream together and he said, “Maria, I love thee and
thou art so lovely and so wonderful and so beautiful and it does such things to me to be
with thee that I feel as though I wanted to die when I am loving thee.”
 “Oh,” she said. “I die each time. Do you not die?”
 “No. Almost. But did thee feel the earth move?”
 “Yes. As I died. Put thy arm around me, please.”
 “No. I have thy hand. Thy hand is enough.”
 He looked at her and across the meadow where a hawk was hunting and the big
afternoon clouds were coming now over the mountains.
 “And it is not thus for thee with others?” Maria asked him, they now walking hand in
hand.
 “No. Truly.”
“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway 89
 “Thou hast loved many others.”
 “Some. But not as thee.”
 “And it was not thus? Truly?”
 “It was a pleasure but it was not thus.”
 “And then the earth moved. The earth never moved before?”
 “Nay. Truly never.”
 “Ay,” she said. “And this we have for one day.”
 He said nothing.
 “But we have had it now at least,” Maria said. “And do you like me too? Do I please
thee? I will look better later.”
 “Thou art very beautiful now.”
 “Nay,” she said. “But stroke thy hand across my head.”
 He did that feeling her cropped hair soft and flattening and then rising between his
fingers and he put both hands on her head and turned her face up to his and kissed her.
 “I like to kiss very much,” she said. “But I do not do it well.”
 “Thou hast no need to kiss.”
 “Yes, I have. If I am to be thy woman I should please thee in all ways.”
 “You please me enough. I would not be more pleased. There is no thing I could do if I
were more pleased.”
 “But you will see,” she said very happily. “My hair amuses thee now because it is odd.
But every day it is growing. It will be long and then I will not look ugly and perhaps you
will love me very much.”
 “Thou hast a lovely body,” he said. “The loveliest in the world.”
 “It is only young and thin.”
 “No. In a fine body there is magic. I do not know what makes it in one and not in
another. But thou hast it.”
 “For thee,” she said.
 “Nay.”
 “Yes. For thee and for thee always and only for thee. But it is littie to bring thee. I
would learn to take good care of thee. But tell me truly. Did the earth never move for
thee before?”
 “Never,” he said truly.
 “Now am I happy,” she said. “Now am I truly happy.
 “You are thinking of something else now?” she asked him.
 “Yes. My work.”
 “I wish we had horses to ride,” Maria said. “In my happiness I would like to be on a
good horse and ride fast with thee riding fast beside me and we would ride faster and
faster, galloping, and never pass my happiness.”
 “We could take thy happiness in a plane,” he said absently.
 “And go over and over in the sky like the little pursuit planes shining in the sun,” she
said. “Rolling it in loops and in dives. Qué bueno!” she laughed. “My happiness would
not even notice it.”
 “Thy happiness has a good stomach,” he said half hearing what she said.
 Because now he was not there. He was walking beside her but his mind was thinking
of the problem of the bridge now and it was all clear and hard and sharp as when a
camera lens is brought into focus. He saw the two posts and Anselmo and the gypsy
watching. He saw the road empty and he saw movement on it. He saw where he would
place the two automatic rifles to get the most level field of fire, and who will serve them,
he thought, me at the end, but who at the start? He placed the charges, wedged and
lashed them, sunk his caps and crimped them, ran his wires, hooked them up and got
back to where he had placed the old box of the exploder and then he started to think of
all the things that could have happened and that might go wrong. Stop it, he told himself.
You have made love to this girl and now your head is clear, properly clear, and you start
to worry. It is one thing to think you must do and it is another thing to worry. Don’t worry.
You mustn’t worry. You know the things that you may have to do and you know what
“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway 90
may happen. Certainly it may happen.
 You went into it knowing what you were fighting for. You were fighting against exactly
what you were doing and being forced into doing to have any chance of winning. So
now he was compelled to use these people whom he liked as you should use troops
toward whom you have no feeling at all if you were to be successful. Pablo was
evidently the smartest. He knew how bad it was instantly. The woman was all for it, and
still was; but the realization of what it really consisted in had overcome her steadily and
it had done plenty to her already. Sordo recognized it instantly and would do it but he did
not like it any more than he, Robert Jordan, liked it.
 So you say that it is not that which will happen to yourself but that which may happen
to the woman and the girl and to the others that you think of. All right. What would have
happened to them if you had not come? What happened to them and what passed with
them before you were ever here? You must not think in that way. You have no
responsibility for them except in action. The orders do not come from you. They come
from Golz. And who is Golz? A good general. The best you’ve ever served under. But
should a man carry out impossible orders knowing what they lead to? Even though they
come from Golz, who is the party as well as the army? Yes. He should carry them out
because it is only in the performing of them that they can prove to be impossible. How
do you know they are impossible until you have tried them? If every one said orders
were impossible to carry out when they were received where Would you be? Where
would we all be if you just said, “Impossible,” when orders came?
 He had seen enough of commanders to whom all orders were impossible. That swine
Gomez in Estremadura. He had seen enough attacks when the flanks did not advance
because it was impossible. No, he would carry out the orders and it was bad luck that
you liked the people you must do it with.
 In all the work that they, the partizans, did, they brought added danger and bad luck to
the people that sheltered them and worked with them. For what? So that, eventually,
there should be no more danger and so that the country should be a good place to live
in. That was true no matter how trite it sounded.
 If the Republic lost it would be impossible for those who believed in it to live in Spain.
But would it? Yes, he knew that it would be, from the things that happened in the parts
the fascists had already taken.
 Pablo was a swine but the others were fine people and was it not a betrayal of them
all to get them to do this? Perhaps it was. But if they did not do it two squadrons of
cavalry would come and hunt them out of these hills in a week.
 No. There was nothing to be gained by leaving them alone. Except that all people
should be left alone and you should interfere with no one. So he believed that, did he?
Yes, he believed that. And what about a planned society and the rest of it? That was for
the others to do. He had something else to do after this war. He fought now in this war
because it had started in a country that he loved and he believed in the Republic and
that if it were destroyed life would be unbearable for all those people who believed in it.
He was under Communist discipline for the duration of the war. Here in Spain the
Communists offered the best discipline and the soundest and sanest for the prosecution
of the war. He accepted their discipline for the duration of the war because, in the
conduct of the war, they were the only party whose program and whose discipline he
could respect.
 What were his politics then? He had none now, he told himself. But do not tell any one
else that, he thought. Don’t ever admit that. And what are you going to do afterwards? I
am going back and earn my living teaching Spanish as before, and I am going to write a
true book. I’ll bet, he said. I’ll bet that will be easy.
 He would have to talk with Pablo about politics. It would certainly be interesting to see
what his political development had been. The classical move from left to right, probably;
like old Lerroux. Pablo was quite a lot like Lerroux. Prieto was as bad. Pablo and Prieto
had about an equal faith in the ultimate victory. They all had the politics of horse thieves.
He believed in the Republic as a form of government but the Republic would have to get
“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway 91
rid of all of that bunch of horse thieves that brought it to the pass it was in when the
rebellion started. Was there ever a people whose leaders were as truly their enemies as
this one?
 Enemies of the people. That was a phrase he might omit. That was a catch phrase he
would skip. That was one thing that sleeping with Maria had done. He had gotten to be
as bigoted and hidebound about his politics as a hard-shelled Baptist and phrases like
enemies of the people came into his mind without his much criticizing them in any way.
Any sort of clichés both revolutionary and patriotic. His mind employed them without
criticism. Of course they were true but it was too easy to be nimble about using them.
But since last night and this afternoon his mind was much clearer and cleaner on that
business. Bigotry is an odd thing. To be bigoted you have to be absolutely sure that you
are right and nothing makes that surety and righteousness like continence. Continence
is the foe of heresy.
 How would that premise stand up if he examined it? That was probably why the
Communists were always cracking down on Bohemianism. When you were drunk or
when you committed either fornication or adultery you recognized your own personal
fallibility of that so mutable substitute for the apostles’ creed, the party line. Down with
Bohemianism, the sin of Mayakovsky.
 But Mayakovsky was a saint again. That was because he was safely dead. You’ll be
safely dead yourself, he told himself. Now stop thinking that sort of thing. Think about
Maria.
 Maria was very hard on his bigotry. So far she had not affected his resolution but he
would much prefer not to die. He would abandon a hero’s or a martyr’s end gladly. He
did not want to make a Thermopylae, nor be Horatius at any bridge, nor be the Dutch
boy With his finger in that dyke. No. He would like to spend some time With Maria. That
was the simplest expression of it. He would like to spend a long, long time with her.
 He did not believe there was ever going to be any such thing as a long time any more
but if there ever was such a thing he would like to spend it with her. We could go into the
hotel and register as Doctor and Mrs. Livingstone I presume, he thought.
 Why not marry her? Sure, he thought. I will marry her. Then we will be Mt and Mrs.
Robert Jordan of Sun Valley, Idaho. Or Corpus Christi, Texas, or Butte, Montana.
 Spanish girls make wonderful wives. I’ve never had one so I know. And when I get my
job back at the university she can be an instructor’s wife and when undergraduates who
take Spanish IV come in to smoke pipes in the evening and have those so valuable
informal discussions about Quevedo, Lope de Vega, Galdós and the other always
admirable dead, Maria can tell them about how some of the blue-shirted crusaders for
the true faith sat on her head while others twisted her arms and pulled her skirts up and
stuffed them in her mouth.
 I wonder how they will like Maria in Missoula, Montana? That is if I can get a job back
in Missoula. I suppose that I am ticketed as a Red there now for good and will be on the
general blacklist. Though you never know. You never can tell. They’ve no proof of what
you do, and as a matter of fact they would never believe it if you told them, and my
passport was valid for Spain before they issued the restrictions.
 The time for getting back will not be until the fall of thirtyseven. I left in the summer of
thirty-six and though the leave is for a year you do not need to be back until the fall term
opens in the following year. There is a lot of time between now and the fall term. There
is a lot of time between now and day after tomorrow if you want to put it that way. No. I
think there is no need to worry about the university. Just you turn up there in the fall and
it will be all right. Just try and turn up there.
 But it has been a strange life for a long time now. Damned if it hasn’t. Spain was your
work and your job, so being in Spain was natural and sound. You had worked summers
on engineering projects and in the forest service building roads and in the park and
learned to handle powder, so the demolition was a sound and normal job too. Always a
little hasty, but sound.
 Once you accept the idea of demolition as a problem it is only a problem. But there
“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway 92
was plenty that was not so good that went with it although God knows you took it easily
enough. There was the constant attempt to approximate the conditions of successful
assassination that accompanied the demolition. Did big words make it more defensible?
Did they make killing any more palatable? You took to it a little too readily if you ask me,
he told himself. And what you will be like or just exactly what you will be suited for when
you leave the service of the Republic is, to me, he thought, extremely doubtful. But my
guess is you will get rid of all that by writing about it, he said. Once you write it down it is
all gone. It will be a good book if you can write it. Much better than the other.
 But in the meantime all the life you have or ever will have is today, tonight, tomorrow,
today, tonight, tomorrow, over and over again (I hope), he thought and so you had better
take what time there is and be very thankful for it. If the bridge goes bad. It does not look
too good just now.
 But Maria has been good. Has she not? Oh, has she not, he thought. Maybe that is
what I am to get now from life. Maybe that is my life and instead of it being threescore
years and ten it is fortyeight hours or just threescore hours and ten or twelve rather.
Twenty-four hours in a day would be threescore and twelve for the three full days.
 I suppose it is possible to live as full a life in seventy hours as in seventy years;
granted that your life has been full up to the time that the seventy hours start and that
you have reached a certain age.
 What nonsense, he thought. What rot you get to thinking by yourself. That is really
nonsense. And maybe it isn’t nonsense too. Well, we will see. The last time I slept with a
girl was in Madrid. No it wasn’t. It was in the Escorial and, except that I woke in the night
and thought it was some one else and was excited until I realized who it really was, it
was just dragging ashes; except that it was pleasant enough. And the time before that
was in Madrid and except for some lying and pretending I did to myself as to identity
while things were going on, it was the same or something less. So I am no romantic
glorifier of the Spanish Woman nor did I ever think of a casual piece as anything much
other than a casual piece in any country. But when I am with Maria I love her so that I
feel, literally, as though I would die and I never believed in that nor thought that it could
happen.
 So if your life trades its seventy years for seventy hours I have that value now and I
am lucky enough to know it. And if there is not any such thing as a long time, nor the
rest of your lives, nor from now on, but there is only now, why then now is the thing to
praise and I am very happy with it. Now, ahora, maintenant, heute. Now, it has a funny
sound to be a whole world and your life. Esta noche, tonight, ce soir, heute abend. Life
and wife, Vie and Mari. No it didn’t work out. The French turned it into husband. There
was now and frau; but that did not prove anything either. Take dead, mort, muerto, and
todt. Todt was the deadest of them all. War, guerre, guerra, and krieg. Krieg was the
most like war, or was it? Or was it only that he knew German the least well? Sweetheart,
chérie, prenda, and schatz. He would trade them all for Maria. There was a name.
 Well, they would all be doing it together and it would not be long now. It certainly
looked worse all the time. It was just something that you could not bring off in the
morning. In an impossible situation you hang on until night to get away. You try to last
out until night to get back in. You are all right, maybe, if you can stick it out until dark
and then get in. So what if you start this sticking it out at daylight? How about that? And
that poor bloody Sordo abandoning his pidgin Spanish to explain it to him so carefully.
As though he had not thought about that whenever he had done any particularly bad
thinking ever since Golz had first mentioned it. As though he hadn’t been living with that
like a lump of undigested dough in the pit of his stomach ever since the night before the
night before last.
 What a business. You go along your whole life and they seem as though they mean
something and they always end up not meaning anything. There was never any of what
this is. You think that is one thing that you will never have. And then, on a lousy show
like this, co-ordinating two chicken-crut guerilla bands to help you blow a bridge under
impossible conditions, to abort a counteroffensive that will probably already be started,
“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway 93
you run into a girl like this Maria. Sure. That is what you would do. You ran into her
rather late, that was all.
 So a woman like that Pilar practically pushed this girl into your sleeping bag and what
happens? Yes, what happens? What happens? You tell me what happens, please. Yes.
That is just what happens. That is exactly what happens.
 Don’t lie to yourself about Pilar pushing her into your sleeping robe and try to make it
nothing or to make it lousy. You were gone when you first saw her. When she first
opened her mouth and spoke to you it was there already and you know it. Since you
have it and you never thought you would have it, there is no sense throwing dirt at it,
when you know what it is and you know it came the first time you looked at her as she
came out bent over carrying that iron cooking platter.
 It hit you then and you know it and so why lie about it? You went all strange inside
every time you looked at her and every time she looked at you. So why don’t you admit
it? All right, I’ll admit it. And as for Pilar pushing her onto you, all Pilar did was be an
intelligent woman. She had taken good care of the girl and she saw what was coming
the minute the girl came back into the cave with the cooking dish.
 So she made things easier. She made things easier so that there was last night and
this afternoon. She is a damned sight more civilized than you are and she knows what
time is all about. Yes, he said to himself, I think we can admit that she has certain
notions about the value of time. She took a beating and all because she did not want
other people losing what she’d lost and then the idea of admitting it was lost was too big
a thing to swallow. So she took a beating back there on the hill and I guess we did not
make it any easier for her.
 Well, so that is what happens and what has happened and you might as well admit it
and now you will never have two whole nights with her. Not a lifetime, not to live
together, not to have what people were always supposed to have, not at all. One night
that is past, once one afternoon, one night to come; maybe. No, sir.
 Not time, not happiness, not fun, not children, not a house, not a bathroom, not a
clean pair of pajamas, not the morning paper, not to wake up together, not to wake and
know she’s there and that you’re not alone. No. None of that. But why, when this is all
you are going to get in life of what you want; when you have found it; why not just one
night in a bed with sheets?
 You ask for the impossible. You ask for the ruddy impossible. So if you love this girl as
much as you say you do, you had better love her very hard and make up in intensity
what the relation will lack in duration and in continuity. Do you hear that? In the old days
people devoted a lifetime to it. And now when you have found it if you get two nights you
wonder where all the luck came from. Two nights. Two nights to love, honor and
cherish. For better and for worse. In sickness and in death. No that wasn’t it. In sickness
and in health. Till death do us part. In two nights. Much more than likely. Much more
than likely and now lay off that sort of thinking. You can stop that now. That’s not good
for you. Do nothing that is not good for you. Sure that’s it.
 This was what Golz had talked about. The longer he was around, the smarter Golz
seemed. So this was what he was asking about; the compensation of irregular service.
Had Golz had this and was it the urgency and the lack of time and the circumstances
that made it? Was this something that happened to every one given comparable
circumstances? And did he only think it was something special because it was
happening to him? Had Golz slept around in a hurry when he was commanding irregular
cavalry in the Red Army and had the combination of the circumstances and the rest of it
made the girls seem the way Maria was?
 Probably Golz knew all about this too and wanted to make the point that you must
make your whole life in the two nights that are given to you; that living as we do now you
must concentrate all of that which you should always have into the short time that you
can have it.
 It was a good system of belief. But he did not believe that Maria had only been made
by the circumstances. Unless, of course, she is a reaction from her own circumstance
“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway 94
as well as his. Her one circumstance is not so good, he thought. No, not so good.
 If this was how it was then this was how it was. But there was no law that made him
say he liked it. I did not know that I could ever feel what I have felt, he thought. Nor that
this could happen to me. I would like to have it for my whole life. You will, the other part
of him said. You will. You have it now and that is all your whole life is; now. There is
nothing else than now. There is neither yesterday, certainly, nor is there any tomorrow.
How old must you be before you know that? There is only now, and if now is only two
days, then two days is your life and everything in it will be in proportion. This is how you
live a life in two days. And if you stop complaining and asking for what you never will
get, you will have a good life. A good life is not measured by any biblical span.
 So now do not worry, take what you have, and do your work and you will have a long
life and a very merry one. Hasn’t it been merry lately? What are you complaining about?
That’s the thing about this sort of work, he told himself, and was very pleased with the
thought, it isn’t so much what you learn as it is the people you meet. He was pleased
then because he was joking and he came back to the girl.
 “I love you, rabbit,” he said to the girl. “What was it you were saying?”
 “I was saying,” she told him, “that you must not worry about your work because I will
not bother you nor interfere. If there is anything I can do you will tell me.”
 “There’s nothing,” he said. “It is really very simple.”
 “I will learn from Pilar what I should do to take care of a man well and those things I
will do,” Maria said. “Then, as I learn, I will discover things for myself and other things
you can tell me.”
 “There is nothing to do.”
 “Qué va, man, there is nothing! Thy sleeping robe, this morning, should have been
shaken and aired and hung somewhere in the sun. Then, before the dew comes, it
should be taken into shelter.”
 “Go on, rabbit.”
 “Thy socks should be washed and dried. I would see thee had two pair.”
 “What else?”
 “If thou would show me I would clean and oil thy pistol.”
 “Kiss me,” Robert Jordan said.
 “Nay, this is serious. Wilt thou show me about the pistol? Pilar has rags and oil. There
is a cleaning rod inside the cave that should fit it.”
 “Sure. I’ll show you.”
 “Then,” Maria said. “If you will teach me to shoot it either one of us could shoot the
other and himself, or herself, if one were wounded and it were necessary to avoid
capture.”
 “Very interesting,” Robert Jordan said. “Do you have many ideas like that?”
 “Not many,” Maria said. “But it is a good one. Pilar gave me this and showed me how
to use it,” she opened the breast pocket of her shirt and took out a cut-down leather
holder such as pocket combs are carried in and, removing a wide rubber band that
closed both ends, took out a Gem type, single-edged razor blade. “I keep this always,”
she explained. “Pilar says you must make the cut here just below the ear and draw it
toward here.” She showed him with her finger. “She says there is a big artery there and
that drawing the blade from there you cannot miss it. Also, she says there is no pain and
you must simply press firmly below the ear and draw it downward. She says it is nothing
and that they cannot stop it if it is done.”
 “That’s right,” said Robert Jordan. “That’s the carotid artery.”
 So she goes around with that all the time, he thought, as a definitely accepted and
properly organized possibility.
 “But I would rather have thee shoot me,” Maria said. “Promise if there is ever any need
that thou wilt shoot me.”
 “Sure,” Robert Jordan said. “I promise.”
 “Thank thee very much,” Maria told him. “I know it is not easy to do.”
 “That’s all right,” Robert Jordan said.
“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway 95
 You forget all this, he thought. You forget about the beauties of a civil war when you
keep your mind too much on your work. You have forgotten this. Well, you are supposed
to. Kashkin couldn’t forget it and it spoiled his work. Or do you think the old boy had a
hunch? It was very strange because he had experienced absolutely no emotion about
the shooting of Kashkin. He expected that at some time he might have it. But so far
there had been absolutely none.
 “But there are other things I can do for thee,” Maria told him, walking close beside him,
now, very serious and womanly.
 “Besides shoot me?”
 “Yes. I can roll cigarettes for thee when thou hast no more of those with tubes. Pilar
has taught me to roll them very well, tight and neat and not spilling.”
 “Excellent,” said Robert Jordan. “Do you lick them yourself?”
 “Yes,” the girl said, “and when thou art wounded I will care for thee and dress thy
wound and wash thee and feed thee—”
 “Maybe I won’t be wounded,” Robert Jordan said.
 “Then when you are sick I will care for thee and make thee soups and clean thee and
do all for thee. And I will read to thee.”
 “Maybe I won’t get sick.”
 “Then I will bring thee coffee in the morning when thou wakest—”
 “Maybe I don’t like coffee,” Robert Jordan told her.
 “Nay, but you do,” the girl said happily. “This morning you took two cups.”
 “Suppose I get tired of coffee and there’s no need to shoot me and I’m neither
wounded nor sick and I give up smoking and have only one pair of socks and hang up
my robe myself. What then, rabbit?” he patted her on the back. “What then?”
 “Then,” said Maria, “I will borrow the scissors of Pilar and cut thy hair.”
 “I don’t like to have my hair cut.”
 “Neither do I,” said Maria. “And I like thy hair as it is. So. If there is nothing to do for
thee, I will sit by thee and watch thee and in the nights we will make love.”
 “Good,” Robert Jordan said. “The last project is very sensible.”
 “To me it seems the same,” Maria smiled. “Oh, Inglés,” she said.
 “My name is Roberto.”
 “Nay. But I call thee Inglés as Pilar does.”
 “Still it is Roberto.”
 “No,” she told him. “Now for a whole day it is Inglés. And Inglés, can I help thee with
thy work?”
 “No. What I do now I do alone and very coldly in my head.”
 “Good,” she said. “And when will it be finished?”
 “Tonight, with luck.”
 “Good,” she said.
 Below them was the last woods that led to the camp.
 “Who is that?” Robert Jordan asked and pointed.
 “Pilar,” the girl said, looking along his arm. “Surely it is Pilar.”
 At the lower edge of the meadow where the first trees grew the woman was sitting, her
head on her arms. She looked like a dark bundle from where they stood; black against
the brown of the tree trunk.
 “Come on,” Robert Jordan said and started to run toward her through the knee-high
heather. It was heavy and hard to run in and when he had run a little way, he slowed
and walked. He could see the woman’s head was on her folded arms and she looked
broad and black against the tree trunk. He came up to her and said, “Pilar!” sharply.
 The woman raised her head and looked up at him.
 “Oh,” she said. “You have terminated already?”
 “Art thou ill?” he asked and bent down by her.
 “Qué va,” she said. “I was asleep.”
 “Pilar,” Maria, who had come up, said and kneeled down by her. “How are you? Are
you all right?”
“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway 96
 “I’m magnificent,” Pilar said but she did not get up. She looked at the two of them.
“Well, Inglés,” she said. “You have been doing manly tricks again?”
 “You are all right?” Robert Jordan asked, ignoring the words.
 “Why not? I slept. Did you?”
 “No.”
 “Well,” Pilar said to the girl. “It seems to agree with you.”
 Maria blushed and said nothing.
 “Leave her alone,” Robert Jordan said.
 “No one spoke to thee,” Pilar told him. “Maria,” she said and her voice was hard. The
girl did not look up.
 “Maria,” the woman said again. “I said it seems to agree with thee.”
 “Oh, leave her alone,” Robert Jordan said again.
 “Shut up, you,” Pilar said without looking at him. “Listen, Maria, tell me one thing.”
 “No,” Maria said and shook her head.
 “Maria,” Pilar said, and her voice was as hard as her face and there was nothing
friendly in her face. “Tell me one thing of thy own volition.”
 The girl shook her head.
 Robert Jordan was thinking, if I did not have to work with this woman and her drunken
man and her chicken-crut outfit, I would slap her so hard across the face that—.
 “Go ahead and tell me,” Pilar said to the girl.
 “No,” Maria said. “No.”
 “Leave her alone,” Robert Jordan said and his voice did not sound like his own voice.
I’ll slap her anyway and the hell with it, he thought.
 Pilar did not even speak to him. It was not like a snake charming a bird, nor a cat with
a bird. There was nothing predatory. Nor was there anything perverted about it. There
was a spreading, though, as a cobra’s hood spreads. He could feel this. He could feel
the menace of the spreading. But the spreading was a domination, not of evil, but of
searching. I wish I did not see this, Robert Jordan thought. But it is not a business for
slapping.
 “Maria,” Pilar said. “I will not touch thee. Tell me now of thy own volition.”
 “De tu propia voluntad,” the words were in Spanish.
 The girl shook her head.
 “Maria,” Pilar said. “Now and of thy own volition. You hear me? Anything at all.”
 “No,” the girl said softly. “No and no.”
 “Now you will tell me,” Pilar told her. “Anything at all. You will see. Now you will tell
me.”
 “The earth moved,” Maria said, not looking at the woman. “Truly. It was a thing I
cannot tell thee.”
 “So,” Pilar said and her voice was warm and friendly and there was no compulsion in
it. But Robert Jordan noticed there were small drops of perspiration on her forehead and
her lips. “So there was that. So that was it.”
 “It is true,” Maria said and bit her lip.
 “Of course it is true,” Pilar said kindly. “But do not tell it to your own people for they
never will believe you. You have no Cali blood, Inglés?”
 She got to her feet, Robert Jordan helping her up.
 “No,” he said. “Not that I know of.”
 “Nor has the Maria that she knows of,” Pilar said. “Pues es muy raro. It is very
strange.”
 “But it happened, Pilar,” Maria said.
 “Cómo que no, hija?” Pilar said. “Why not, daughter? When I was young the earth
moved so that you could feel it all shift in space and were afraid it would go out from
under you. It happened every night.”
 “You lie,” Maria said.
 “Yes,” Pilar said. “I lie. It never moves more than three times in a lifetime. Did it really
move?”
“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway 97
 “Yes,” the girl said. “Truly.”
 “For you, Inglés?” Pilar looked at Robert Jordan. “Don’t lie.”
 “Yes,” he said. “Truly.”
 “Good,” said Pilar. “Good. That is something.”
 “What do you mean about the three times?” Maria asked. “Why do you say that?”
 “Three times,” said Pilar. “Now you’ve had one.”
 “Only three times?”
 “For most people, never,” Pilar told her. “You are sure it moved?”
 “One could have fallen off,” Maria said.
 “I guess it moved, then,” Pilar said. “Come, then, and let us get to camp.”
 “What’s this nonsense about three times?” Robert Jordan said to the big woman as
they walked through the pines together.
 “Nonsense?” she looked at him wryly. “Don’t talk to me of nonsense, little English.”
 “Is it a wizardry like the palms of the hands?”
 “Nay, it is common and proven knowledge with Gitanos.”
 “But we are not Gitanos.”
 “Nay. But you have had a little luck. Non-gypsies have a little luck sometimes.”
 “You mean it truly about the three times?”
 She looked at him again, oddly. “Leave me, Inglés,” she said. “Don’t molest me. You
are too young for me to speak to.”
 “But, Pilar,” Maria said.
 “Shut up,” Pilar told her. “You have had one and there are two more in the world for
thee.”
 “And you?” Robert Jordan asked her.
 “Two,” said Pilar and put up two fingers. “Two. And there will never be a third.”
 “Why not?” Maria asked.
 “Oh, shut up,” Pilar said. “Shut up. Busnes of thy age bore me.”
 “Why not a third?” Robert Jordan asked.
 “Oh, shut up, will you?” Pilar said. “Shut up!”
 All right, Robert Jordan said to himself. Only I am not having any. I’ve known a lot of
gypsies and they are strange enough. But so are we. The difference is we have to make
an honest living. Nobody knows what tribes we came from nor what our tribal
inheritance is nor what the mysteries were in the woods where the people lived that we
came from. All we know is that we do not know. We know nothing about what happens
to us in the nights. When it happens in the day though, it is something. Whatever
happened, happened and now this woman not only has to make the girl say it when she
did not want to; but she has to take it over and make it her own. She has to make it into
a gypsy thing. I thought she took a beating up the hill but she was certainly dominating
just now back there. If it had been evil she should have been shot. But it wasn’t evil. It
was only wanting to keep her hold on life. To keep it through Maria.
 When you get through with this war you might take up the study of women, he said to
himself. You could start with Pilar. She has put in a pretty complicated day, if you ask
me. She never brought in the gypsy stuff before. Except the hand, he thought. Yes, of
course the hand. And I don’t think she was faking about the hand. She wouldn’t tell me
what she saw, of course. Whatever she saw she believed in herself. But that proves
nothing.
 “Listen, Pilar,” he said to the woman.
 Pilar looked at him and smiled.
 “What is it?” she asked.
 “Don’t be so mysterious,” Robert Jordan said. “These mysteries tire me very much.”
 “So?” Pilar said.
 “I do not believe in ogres, soothsayers, fortune tellers, or chicken-crut gypsy
witchcraft.”
 “Oh,” said Pilar.
 “No. And you can leave the girl alone.”
“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway 98
 “I will leave the girl alone.”
 “And leave the mysteries,” Robert Jordan said. “We have enough work and enough
things that will be done without complicating it with chicken-crut. Fewer mysteries and
more work.”
 “I see,” said Pilar and nodded her head in agreement. “And listen, Inglés,” she said
and smiled at him. “Did the earth move?”
 “Yes, God damn you. It moved.”
 Pilar laughed and laughed and stood looking at Robert Jordan laughing.
 “Oh, Inglés. Inglés,” she said laughing. “You are very comical. You must do much
work now to regain thy dignity.”
 The Hell with you, Robert Jordan thought. But he kept his mouth shut. While they had
spoken the sun had clouded over and as he looked back up toward the mountains the
sky was now heavy and gray.
 “Sure,” Pilar said to him, looking at the sky. “It will snow.”
 “Now? Almost in June?”
 “Why not? These mountains do not know the names of the months. We are in the
moon of May.”
 “It can’t be snow,” he said. “It can’t snow.”
 “Just the same, Inglés,” she said to him, “it will snow.”
 Robert Jordan looked up at the thick gray of the sky with the sun gone faintly yellow,
and now as he watched gone completely and the gray becoming uniform so that it was
soft and heavy; the gray now cutting off the tops of the mountains.
 “Yes,” he said. “I guess you are right.”
14
 By the time they reached the camp it was snowing and the flakes were dropping
diagonally through the pines. They slanted through the trees, sparse at first and circling
as they fell, and then, as the cold wind came driving down the mountain, they came
whirling and thick and Robert Jordan stood in front of the cave in a rage and watched
them.
 “We will have much snow,” Pablo said. His voice was thick and his eyes were red and
bleary.
 “Has the gypsy come in?” Robert Jordan asked him.
 “No,” Pablo said. “Neither him nor the old man.”
 “Will you come with me to the upper post on the road?”
 “No,” Pablo said. “I will take no part in this.”
 “I will find it myself.”
 “In this storm you might miss it,” Pablo said. “I would not go now.”
 “It’s just downhill to the road and then follow it up.”
 “You could find it. But thy two sentries will be coming up now with the snow and you
would miss them on the way.”
 “The old man is waiting for me.”
 “Nay. He will come in now with the snow.
 Pablo looked at the snow that was blowing fast now past the mouth of the cave and
said, “You do not like the snow, Inglés?”
 Robert Jordan swore and Pablo looked at him through his bleary eyes and laughed.
 “With this thy offensive goes, Inglés,” he said. “Come into the cave and thy people will
be in directly.”
 Inside the cave Maria was busy at the fire and Pilar at the kitchen table. The fire was
smoking but, as the girl worked with it, poking in a stick of wood and then fanning it with
a folded paper, there was a puff and then a flare and the wood was burning, drawing
brightly as the wind sucked a draft out of the hole in the roof.
 “And this snow,” Robert Jordan said. “You think there will be much?”
 “Much,” Pablo said contentedly. Then called to Pilar, “You don’t like it, woman, either?
“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway 99
Now that you command you do not like this snow?”
 “A mi qué?” Pilar said, over her shoulder. “If it snows it snows.”
 “Drink some wine, Inglés,” Pablo said. “I have been drinking all day waiting for the
snow.”
 “Give me a cup,” Robert Jordan said.
 “To the snow,” Pablo said and touched cups with him. Robert Jordan looked him in the
eyes and clinked his cup. You bleary-eyed murderous sod, he thought. I’d like to clink
this cup against your teeth. Take it easy, he told himself, take it easy.
 “It is very beautiful the snow,” Pablo said. “You won’t want to sleep outside with the
snow falling.”
 So that’s on your mind too is it? Robert Jordan thought. You’ve a lot of troubles,
haven’t you, Pablo?
 “No?” he said, politely.
 “No. Very cold,” Pablo said. “Very wet.”
 You don’t know why those old eiderdowns cost sixty-five dollars, Robert Jordan
thought. I’d like to have a dollar for every time I’ve slept in that thing in the snow.
 “Then I should sleep in here?” he asked politely.
 “Yes.”
 “Thanks,” Robert Jordan said. “I’ll be sleeping outside.”
 “In the snow?”
 “Yes” (damn your bloody, red pig-eyes and your swine-bristly swines-end of a face).
“In the snow.” (In the utterly damned, ruinous, unexpected, slutting, defeat-conniving,
bastard-cessery of the snow.)
 He went over to where Maria had just put another piece of pine on the fire.
 “Very beautiful, the snow,” he said to the girl.
 “But it is bad for the work, isn’t it?” she asked him. “Aren’t you worried?”
 “Qué va,” he said. “Worrying is no good. When will supper be ready?”
 “I thought you would have an appetite,” Pilar said. “Do you want a cut of cheese now?”
 “Thanks,” he said and she cut him a slice, reaching up to unhook the big cheese that
hung in a net from the ceiling, drawing a knife across the open end and handing him the
heavy slice. He stood, eating it. It was just a little too goaty to be enjoyable.
 “Maria,” Pablo said from the table where he was sitting.
 “What?” the girl asked.
 “Wipe the table clean, Maria,” Pablo said and grinned at Robert Jordan.
 “Wipe thine own spillings,” Pilar said to him. “Wipe first thy chin and thy shirt and then
the table.”
 “Maria,” Pablo called.
 “Pay no heed to him. He is drunk,” Pilar said.
 “Maria,” Pablo called. “It is still snowing and the snow is beautiful.”
 He doesn’t know about that robe, Robert Jordan thought. Good old pig-eyes doesn’t
know why I paid the Woods boys sixty-five dollars for that robe. I wish the gypsy would
come in though. As soon as the gypsy comes I’ll go after the old man. I should go now
but it is very possible that I would miss them. I don’t know where he is posted.
 “Want to make snowballs?” he said to Pablo. “Want to have a snowball fight?”
 “What?” Pablo asked. “What do you propose?”
 “Nothing,” Robert Jordan said. “Got your saddles covered up good?”
 “Yes.”
 Then in English Robert Jordan said, “Going to grain those horses or peg them out and
let them dig for it?”
 “What?”
 “Nothing. It’s your problem, old pal. I’m going out of here on my feet.”
 “Why do you speak in English?” Pablo asked.
 “I don’t know,” Robert Jordan said. “When I get very tired sometimes I speak English.
Or when I get very disgusted. Or baffled, say. When I get highly baffled I just talk
English to hear the sound of it. It’s a reassuring noise. You ought to try it sometime.”
“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway 100
 “What do you say, Inglés?” Pilar said. “It sounds very interesting but I do not
understand.”
 “Nothing,” Robert Jordan said. “I said, ‘nothing’ in English.”
 “Well then, talk Spanish,” Pilar said. “It’s shorter and simpler in Spanish.”
 “Surely,” Robert Jordan said. But oh boy, he thought, oh Pablo, oh Pilar, oh Maria, oh
you two brothers in the corner whose names I’ve forgotten and must remember, but I
get tired of it sometimes. Of it and of you and of me and of the war and why in all why
did it have to snow now? That’s too bloody much. No, it’s not. Nothing is too bloody
much. You just have to take it and fight out of it and now stop prima-donnaing and
accept the fact that it is snowing as you did a moment ago and the next thing is to check
with your gypsy and pick up your old man. But to snow! Now in this month. Cut it out, he
said to himself. Cut it out and take it. It’s that cup, you know. How did it go about that
cup? He’d either have to improve his memory or else never think of quotations because
when you missed one it hung in your mind like a name you had forgotten and you could
not get rid of it. How did it go about that cup?
 “Let me have a cup of wine, please,” he said in Spanish. Then, “Lots of snow? Eh?” he
said to Pablo. “Mucha nieve.”
 The drunken man looked up at him and grinned. He nodded his head and grinned
again.
 “No offensive. No aviones. No bridge. Just snow,” Pablo said.
 “You expect it to last a long time?” Robert Jordan sat down by him. “You think we’re
going to be snowed in all summer, Pablo, old boy?”
 “All summer, no,” Pablo said. “Tonight and tomorrow, yes.”
 “What makes you think so?”
 “There are two kinds of storms,” Pablo said, heavily and judiciously. “One comes from
the Pyrenees. With this one there is great cold. It is too late for this one.”
 “Good,” Robert Jordan said. “That’s something.”
 “This storm comes from the Cantabrico,” Pablo said. “It comes from the sea. With the
wind in this direction there will be a great storm and much snow.”
 “Where did you learn all this, old timer?” Robert Jordan asked.
 Now that his rage was gone he was excited by this storm as he was always by all
storms. In a blizzard, a gale, a sudden line squall, a tropical storm, or a summer thunder
shower in the mountains there was an excitement that came to him from no other thing.
It was like the excitement of battle except that it was clean. There is a wind that blows
through battle but that was a hot wind; hot and dry as your mouth; and it blew heavily;
hot and dirtily; and it rose and died away with the fortunes of the day. He knew that wind
well.
 But a snowstorm was the opposite of all of that. In the snowstorm you came close to
wild animals and they were not afraid. They travelled across country not knowing where
they were and the deer stood sometimes in the lee of the cabin. In a snowstorm you
rode up to a moose and he mistook your horse for another moose and trotted forward to
meet you. In a snowstorm it always seemed, for a time, as though there were no
enemies. In a snowstorm the wind could blow a gale; but it blew a white cleanness and
the air was full of a driving whiteness and all things were changed and when the wind
stopped there would be the stillness. This was a big storm and he might as well enjoy it.
It was ruining everything, but you might as well enjoy it.
 “I was an arroyero for many years,” Pablo said. “We trucked freight across the
mountains with the big carts before the camions came into use. In that business we
learned the weather.”
 “And how did you get into the movement?”
 “I was always of the left,” Pablo said. “We had many contacts with the people of
Asturias where they are much developed politically. I have always been for the
Republic.”
 “But what were you doing before the movement?”
 “I worked then for a horse contractor of Zaragoza. He furnished horses for the bull
“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway 101
rings as well as remounts for the army. It was then that I met Pilar who was, as she told
you, with the matador Finito de Palencia.”
 He said this with considerable pride.
 “He wasn’t much of a matador,” one of the brothers at the table said looking at Pilar’s
back where she stood in front of the stove.
 “No?” Pilar said, turning around and looking at the man. “He wasn’t much of a
matador?”
 Standing there now in the cave by the cooking fire she could see him, short and brown
and sober-faced, with the sad eyes, the cheeks sunken and the black hair curled wet on
his forehead where the tightfitting matador’s hat had made a red line that no one else
noticed. She saw him stand, now, facing the five-year-old bull, facing the horns that had
lifted the horses high, the great neck thrusting the horse up, up, as that rider poked into
that neck with the spiked pole, thrusting up and up until the horse went over with a crash
and the rider fell against the wooden fence and, with the bull’s legs thrusting him
forward, the big neck swung the horns that searched the horse for the life that was in
him. She saw him, Finito, the not-so-good matador, now standing in front of the bull and
turning sideways toward him. She saw him now clearly as he furled the heavy flannel
cloth around the stick; the flannel hanging blood-heavy from the passes where it had
swept over the bull’s head and shoulders and the wet streaming shine of his withers and
on down and over his back as the bull raised into the air and the banderillas clattered.
She saw Finito stand five paces from the bull’s head, profiled, the bull standing still and
heavy, and draw the sword slowly up until it was level with his shoulder and then sight
along the dipping blade at a point he could not yet see because the bull’s head was
higher than his eyes. He would bring that head down with the sweep his left arm would
make with the wet, heavy cloth; but now he rocked back a little on his heels and sighted
along the blade, profiled in front of the splintered horn; the bull’s chest heaving and his
eyes watching the cloth.
 She saw him very clearly now and she heard his thin, clear voice as he turned his
head and looked toward the people in the first row of the ring above the red fence and
said, “Let’s see if we can kill him like this!”
 She could hear the voice and then see the first bend of the knee as he started forward
and watch his voyage in onto the horn that lowered now magically as the bull’s muzzle
followed the low swept cloth, the thin, brown wrist controlled, sweeping the horns down
and past, as the sword entered the dusty height of the withers.
 She saw its brightness going in slowly and steadily as though the bull’s rush plucked it
into himself and out from the man’s hand and she watched it move in until the brown
knuckles rested against the taut hide and the short, brown man whose eyes had never
left the entry place of the sword now swung his sucked-in belly clear of the horn and
rocked clear from the animal, to stand holding the cloth on the stick in his left hand,
raising his right hand to watch the bull die.
 She saw him standing, his eyes watching the bull trying to hold the ground, watching
the bull sway like a tree before it falls, watching the bull fight to hold his feet to the earth,
the short man’s hand raised in a formal gesture of triumph. She saw him standing there
in the sweated, hollow relief of it being over, feeling the relief that the bull was dying,
feeling the relief that there had been no shock, no blow of the horn as he came clear
from it and then, as he stood, the bull could hold to the earth no longer and crashed
over, rolling dead with all four feet in the air, and she could see the short, brown man
walking tired and unsmiling to the fence.
 She knew he could not run across the ring if his life depended on it and she watched
him walk slowly to the fence and wipe his mouth on a towel and look up at her and
shake his head and then wipe his face on the towel and start his triumphant circling of
the ring.
 She saw him moving slowly, dragging around the ring, smiling, bowing, smiling, his
assistants walking behind him, stooping, picking up cigars, tossing back hats; he circling
the ring sad-eyed and smiling, to end the circle before her. Then she looked over and
“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway 102
saw him sitting now on the step of the wooden fence, his mouth in a towel.
 Pilar saw all this as she stood there over the fire and she said, “So he wasn’t a good
matador? With what class of people is my life passed now!”
 “He was a good matador,” Pablo said. “He was handicapped by his short stature.”
 “And clearly he was tubercular,” Primitivo said.
 “Tubercular?” Pilar said. “Who wouldn’t be tubercular from the punishment he
received? In this country where no poor man can ever hope to make money unless he is
a criminal like Juan March, or a bullfighter, or a tenor in the opera? Why wouldn’t he be
tubercular? In a country where the bourgeoisie over-eat so that their stomachs are all
ruined and they cannot live without bicarbonate of soda and the poor are hungry from
their birth till the day they die, why wouldn’t he be tubercular? If you travelled under the
seats in third-class carriages to ride free when you were following the fairs learning to
fight as a boy, down there in the dust and dirt with the fresh spit and the dry spit,
wouldn’t you be tubercular if your chest was beaten out by horns?”
 “Clearly,” Primitivo said. “I only said he was tubercular.”
 “Of course he was tubercular,” Pilar said, standing there with the big wooden stirring
spoon in her hand. “He was short of stature and he had a thin voice and much fear of
bulls. Never have I seen a man with more fear before the bullfight and never have I seen
a man with less fear in the ring. “You,” she said to Pablo. “You are afraid to die now.
You think that is something of importance. But Finito was afraid all the time and in the
ring he was like a lion.”
 “He had the fame of being very valiant,” the second brother said.
 “Never have I known a man with so much fear,” Pilar said. “He would not even have a
bull’s head in the house. One time at the feria of Valladolid he killed a bull of Pablo
Romero very well—”
 “I remember,” the first brother said. “I was at the ring. It was a soap-colored one with a
curly forehead and with very high horns. It was a bull of over thirty arrobas. It was the
last bull he killed in Valladolid.”
 “Exactly,” Pilar said. “And afterwards the club of enthusiasts who met in the Café
Colon and had taken his name for their club had the head of the bull mounted and
presented it to him at a small banquet at the Café Colon. During the meal they had the
head on the wall, but it was covered with a cloth. I was at the table and others were
there, Pastora, who is uglier than I am, and the Nina de los Peines, and other gypsies
and whores of great category. It was a banquet, small but of great intensity and almost
of a violence due to a dispute between Pastora and one of the most significant whores
over a question of propriety. I, myself, was feeling more than happy and I was sitting by
Finito and I noticed he would not look up at the bull’s head, which was shrouded in a
purple cloth as the images of the saints are covered in church duing the week of the
passion of our former Lord.
 “Finito did not eat much because he had received a palotaxo, a blow from the flat of
the horn when he had gone in to kill in his last corrida of the year at Zaragoza, and it
had rendered him unconscious for some time and even now he could not hold food on
his stomach and he would put his handkerchief to his mouth and deposit a quantity of
blood in it at intervals throughout the banquet. What was I going to tell you?”
 “The bull’s head,” Primitivo said. “The stuffed head of the bull.”
 “Yes,” Pilar said. “Yes. But I must tell certain details so that you will see it. Finito was
never very merry, you know. He was essentially solemn and I had never known him
when we were alone to laugh at anything. Not even at things which were very comic. He
took everything with great seriousness. He was almost as serious as Fernando. But this
was a banquet given him by a club of aficionados banded together into the Club Finito
and it was necessary for him to give an appearance of gaiety and friendliness and
merriment. So all during the meal he smiled and made friendly remarks and it was only I
who noticed what he was doing with the handkerchief. He had three handkerchiefs with
him and he filled the three of them and then he said to me in a very low voice, ‘Pilar, I
can support this no further. I think I must leave.’
“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway 103
 “‘Let us leave then,’ I said. For I saw he was suffering much. There was great hilarity
by this time at the banquet and the noise was tremendous.
 “‘No. I cannot leave,’ Finito said to me. ‘After all it is a club flamed for me and I have
an obligation.’
 “‘If thou art ill let us go,’ I said.
 “‘Nay,’ he said. ‘I will stay. Give me some of that manzanilla.’
 “I did not think it was wise of him to drink, since he had eaten nothing, and since he
had such a condition of the stomach; but he was evidently unable to support the
merriment and the hilarity and the noise longer without taking something. So I watched
him drink, very rapidly, almost a bottle of the manzanilla. Having exhausted his
handkerchiefs he was now employing his napkin for the use he had previously made of
his handkerchiefs.
 “Now indeed the banquet had reached a stage of great enthusiasm and some of the
least heavy of the whores were being paraded around the table on the shoulders of
various of the club members. Pastora was prevailed upon to sing and El Niño Ricardo
played the guitar and it was very moving and an occasion of true joy and drunken
friendship of the highest order. Never have I seen a banquet at which a higher pitch of
real flamenco enthusiasm was reached and yet we had not arrived at the unveiling of
the bull’s head which was, after all, the reason for the celebration of the banquet.
 “I was enjoying myself to such an extent and I was so busy clapping my hands to the
playing of Ricardo and aiding to make up a team to clap for the singing of the Nina de
los Peines that I did not notice that Finito had filled his own napkin by now, and that he
had taken mine. He was drinking more manzanilla now and his eyes were very bright,
and he was nodding very happily to every one. He could not speak much because at
any time, while speaking, he might have to resort to his napkin; but he was giving an
appearance of great gayety and enjoyment which, after all, was what he was there for.
 “So the banquet proceeded and the man who sat next to me had been the former
manager of Rafael el Gallo and he was telling me a story, and the end of it was, ‘So
Rafael came to me and said, “You are the best friend I have in the world and the
noblest. I love you like a brother and I wish to make you a present.” So then he gave me
a beautiful diamond stick pin and kissed me on both cheeks and we were both very
moved. Then Rafael el Gallo, having given me the diamond stick pin, walked out of the
café and I said to Retana who was sitting at the table, “That dirty gypsy had just signed
a contract with another manager.”‘
 “‘“What do you mean?” Retana asked.’
 “‘I’ve managed him for ten years and he has never given me a present before,’ the
manager of El Gallo had said. ‘That’s the only thing it can mean.’ And sure enough it
was true and that was how El Gallo left him.
 “But at this point, Pastora intervened in the conversation, not perhaps as much to
defend the good name of Rafael, since no one had ever spoken harder against him than
she had herself, but because the manager had spoken against the gypsies by
employing the phrase, ‘Dirty gypsy.’ She intervened so forcibly and in such terms that
the manager was reduced to silence. I intervened to quiet Pastora and another Gitana
intervened to quiet me and the din was such that no one could distinguish any words
which passed except the one great word ‘whore’ which roared out above all other words
until quiet was restored and the three of us who had intervened sat looking down into
our glasses and then I noticed that Finito was staring at the bull’s head, still draped in
the purple cloth, with a look of horror on his face.
 “At this moment the president of the Club commenced the speech which was to
precede the unveiling of the head and all through the speech which was applauded with
shouts of ‘Ole!’ and poundings on the table I was watching Finito who was making use
of his, no, my, napkin and sinking further back in his chair and staring with horror and
fascination at the shrouded bull’s head on the wall opposite him.
 “Toward the end of the speech, Finito began to shake his head and he got further
back in the chair all the time.
“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway 104
 “‘How are you, little one?’ I said to him but when he looked at me he did not recognize
me and he only shook his head and said, ‘No. No. No.’
 “So the president of the Club reached the end of the speech and then, with everybody
cheering him, he stood on a chair and reached up and untied the cord that bound the
purple shroud over the head and slowly pulled it clear of the head and it stuck on one of
the horns and he lifted it clear and pulled it off the sharp polished horns and there was
that great yellow bull with black horns that swung Way out and pointed forward, their
white tips sharp as porcupine quills, and the head of the bull was as though he were
alive; his forehead was curly as in life and his nostrils were open and his eyes were
bright and he was there looking straight at Finito.
 “Every one shouted and applauded and Finito sunk further back in the chair and then
every one was quiet and looking at him and he said, ‘No. No,’ and looked at the bull and
pulled further back and then he said, ‘No!’ very loudly and a big blob of blood came out
and he didn’t even put up the napkin and it slid down his chin and he was still looking at
the bull and he said, ‘All season, yes. To make money, yes. To eat, yes. But I can’t eat.
Hear me? My stomach’s bad. But now with the season finished! No! No! No!’ He looked
around at the table and then he looked at the bull’s head and said, ‘No,’ once more and
then he put his head down and he put his napkin up to his mouth and then he just sat
there like that and said nothing and the banquet, which had started so well, and
promised to mark an epoch in hilarity and good fellowship was not a success.”
 “Then how long after that did he die?” Primitivo asked.
 “That winter,” Pilar said. “He never recovered from that last blow with the flat of the
horn in Zaragoza. They are worse than a goring, for the injury is internal and it does not
heal. He received one almost every time he went in to kill and it was for this reason he
was not more successful. It was difficult for him to get out from over the horn because of
his short stature. Nearly always the side of the horn struck him. But of course many
were only glancing blows.”
 “If he was so short he should not have tried to be a matador,” Primitivo said.
 Pilar looked at Robert Jordan and shook her head. Then she bent over the big iron
pot, still shaking her head.
 What a people they are, she thought. What a people are the Spaniards, “and if he was
so short he should not have tried to be a matador.” And I hear it and say nothing. I have
no rage for that and having made an explanation I am silent. How simple it is when one
knows nothing. Qué sencillo! Knowing nothing one says, “He was not much of a
matador.” Knowing nothing another says, “He was tubercular.” And another says, after
one, knowing, has explained, “If he was so short he should not have tried to be a
matador.”
 Now, bending over the fire, she saw on the bed again the naked brown body with the
gnarled scars in both thighs, the deep, seared whorl below the ribs on the right side of
the chest and the long white welt along the side that ended in the armpit. She saw the
eyes closed and the solemn brown face and the curly black hair pushed back now from
the forehead and she was sitting by him on the bed rubbing the legs, chafing the taut
muscles of the calves, kneading them, loosening them, and then tapping them lightly
with her folded hands, loosening the cramped muscles.
 “How is it?” she said to him. “How are the legs, little one?”
 “Very well, Pilar,” he would say without opening his eyes.
 “Do you want me to rub the chest?”
 “Nay, Pilar. Please do not touch it.”
 “And the upper legs?”
 “No. They hurt too badly.”
 “But if I rub them and put liniment on, it will warm them and they will be better.”
 “Nay, Pilar. Thank thee. I would rather they were not touched.”
 “I will wash thee with alcohol.”
 “Yes. Do it very lightly.”
 “You were enormous in the last bull,” she would say to him and he would say, “Yes, I
“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway 105
killed him very well.”
 Then, having washed him and covered him with a sheet, she would lie by him in the
bed and he would put a brown hand out and touch her and say, “Thou art much woman,
Pilar.” It was the nearest to a joke he ever made and then, usually, after the fight, he
would go to sleep and she would lie there, holding his hand in her two hands and
listening to him breathe.
 He was often frightened in his sleep and she would feel his hand grip tightly and see
the sweat bead on his forehead and if he woke, she said, “It’s nothing,” and he slept
again. She was with him thus five years and never was unfaithful to him, that is almost
never, and then after the funeral, she took up with Pablo who led picador horses in the
ring and was like all the bulls that Finito had spent his life killing. But neither bull force
nor bull courage lasted, she knew now, and what did last? I last, she thought. Yes, I
have lasted. But for what?
 “Maria,” she said. “Pay some attention to what you are doing. That is a fire to cook
with. Not to burn down a city.”
 Just then the gypsy came in the door. He was covered with snow and he stood there
holding his carbine and stamping the snow from his feet.
 Robert Jordan stood up and went over to the door, “Well?” he said to the gypsy.
 “Six-hour watches, two men at a time on the big bridge,” the gypsy said. “There are
eight men and a corporal at the roadmender’s hut. Here is thy chronometer.”
 “What about the sawmill post?”
 “The old man is there. He can watch that and the road both.”
 “And the road?” Robert Jordan asked.
 “The same movement as always,” the gypsy said. “Nothing out of the usual. Several
motor cars.”
 The gypsy looked cold, his dark face was drawn with the cold and his hands were red.
Standing in the mouth of the cave he took off his jacket and shook it.
 “I stayed until they changed the watch,” he said. “It was changed at noon and at six.
That is a long watch. I am glad I am not in their army.”
 “Let us go for the old man,” Robert Jordan said, putting on his leather coat.
 “Not me,” the gypsy said. “I go now for the fire and the hot soup. I will tell one of these
where he is and he can guide you. Hey, loafers,” he called to the men who sat at the
table. “Who wants to guide the Inglés to where the old man is watching the road?”
 “I will go,” Fernando rose. “Tell me where it is.”
 “Listen,” the gypsy said. “It is here—” and he told him where the old man, Anselmo,
was posted.
15
 Anselmo was crouched in the lee of the trunk of a big tree and the snow blew past on
either side. He was pressed close against the tree and his hands were inside of the
sleeves of his jacket, each hand shoved up into the opposite sleeve, and his head was
pulled as far down into the jacket as it would go. If I stay here much longer I will freeze,
he thought, and that will be of no value. The Inglés told me to stay until I was relieved
but he did not know then about this storm. There has been no abnormal movement on
the road and I know the dispositions and the habits of this post at the sawmill across the
road. I should go now to the camp. Anybody with sense would be expecting me to return
to the camp. I will stay a little longer, he thought, and then go to the camp. It is the fault
of the orders, which are too rigid. There is no allowance for a change in circumstance.
He rubbed his feet together and then took his hands out of the jacket sleeves and bent
over and rubbed his legs with them and patted his feet together to keep the circulation
going. It was less cold there, out of the wind in the shelter of the tree, but he would have
to start walking shortly.
 As he crouched, rubbing his feet, he heard a motorcar on the road. It had on chains
and one link of chain was slapping and, as he Watched, it came up the snow-covered
“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway 106
road, green and brown painted, in broken patches of daubed color, the windows blued
over so that you could not see in, with only a half circle left clear in the blue for the
occupants to look out through. It was a two-year-old Rolls-Royce town car camouflaged
for the use of the General Staff but Anselmo did not know that. He could not see into the
car where three officers sat wrapped in their capes. Two were on the back seat and one
sat on the folding chair. The officer on the folding chair was looking out of the slit in the
blue of the window as the car passed but Anselmo did not know this. Neither of them
saw the other.
 The car passed in the snow directly below him. Anselmo saw the chauffeur, red-faced
and steel-helmeted, his face and helmet projecting out of the blanket cape he wore and
he saw the forward jut of the automatic rifle the orderly who sat beside the chauffeur
carried. Then the car was gone up the road and Anselmo reached into the inside of his
jacket and took out from his shirt pocket the two sheets torn from Robert Jordan’s
notebook and made a mark after the drawing of a motorcar. It was the tenth car up for
the day. Six had come down. Four were still up. It was not an unusual amount of cars to
move upon that road but Anselmo did not distinguish between the Fords, Fiats, Opels,
Renaults, and Citroens of the staff of the Division that held the passes and the line of
the mountain and the Rolls-Royces, Lancias, Mercedes, and Isottas of the General
Staff. This was the sort of distinction that Robert Jordan should have made and, if he
had been there instead of the old man, he would have appreciated the significance of
these cars which had gone up. But he was not there and the old man simply made a
mark for a motorcar going up the road, on the sheet of note paper.
 Anselmo was now so cold that he decided he had best go to camp before it was dark.
He had no fear of missing the way, but he thought it was useless to stay longer and the
wind was blowing colder all the time and there was no lessening of the snow. But when
he stood up and stamped his feet and looked through the driving snow at the road he
did not start off up the hillside but stayed leaning against the sheltered side of the pine
tree.
 The Inglés told me to stay, he thought. Even now he may be on the way here and, if I
leave this place, he may lose himself in the snow searching for me. All through this war
we have suffered from a lack of discipline and from the disobeying of orders and I will
wait a while still for the Inglés. But if he does not come soon I must go in spite of all
orders for I have a report to make now, and I have much to do in these days, and to
freeze here is an exaggeration and without utility.
 Across the road at the sawmill smoke was coming out of the chimney and Anselmo
could smell it blown toward him through the snow. The fascists are warm, he thought,
and they are comfortable, and tomorrow night we will kill them. It is a strange thing and I
do not like to think of it. I have watched them all day and they are the same men that we
are. I believe that I could walk up to the mill and knock on the door and I would be
welcome except that they have orders to challenge all travellers and ask to see their
papers. It is only orders that come between us. Those men are not fascists. I call them
so, but they are not. They are poor men as we are. They should never be fighting
against us and I do not like to think of the killing.
 These at this post are Gallegos. I know that from hearing them talk this afternoon.
They cannot desert because if they do their families will be shot. Gallegos are either
very intelligent or very dumb and brutal. I have known both kinds. Lister is a Gallego
from the same town as Franco. I wonder what these Gallegos think of this snow now at
this time of year. They have no high mountains such as these and in their country it
always rains and it is always green.
 A light showed in the window of the sawmill and Anselmo shivered and thought, damn
that Inglés! There are the Gallegos warm and in a house here in our country, and I am
freezing behind a tree and we live in a hole in the rocks like beasts in the mountain. But
tomorrow, he thought, the beasts will come out of their hole and these that are now so
comfortable will die warm in their blankets. As those died in the night when we raided
Otero, he thought. He did not like to remember Otero.
“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway 107
 In Otero, that night, was when he first killed and he hoped he would not have to kill in
this of the suppressing of these posts. It was in Otero that Pablo knifed the sentry when
Anselmo pulled the blanket over his head and the sentry caught Anselmo’s foot and
held it, smothered as he was in the blanket, and made a crying noise in the blanket and
Anselmo had to feel in the blanket and knife him until he let go of the foot and was still.
He had his knee across the man’s throat to keep him silent and he was knifing into the
bundle when Pablo tossed the bomb through the window into the room where the men
of the post were all sleeping. And when the flash came it was as though the whole world
burst red and yellow before your eyes and two more bombs were in already. Pablo had
pulled the pins and tossed them quickly through the window, and those who were not
killed in their beds were killed as they rose from bed when the second bomb exploded.
That was in the great days of Pablo when he scourged the country like a tartar and no
fascist post was safe at night.
 And now, he is as finished and as ended as a boar that has been altered, Anselmo
thought, and, when the altering has been accomplished and the squealing is over you
cast the two stones away and the boar, that is a boar no longer, goes snouting and
rooting up to them and eats them. No, he is not that bad, Anselmo grinned, one can
think too badly even of Pablo. But he is ugly enough and changed enough.
 It is too cold, he thought. That the Inglés should come and that I should not have to kill
in this of the posts. These four Gallegos and their corporal are for those who like the
killing. The Inglés said that. I will do it if it is my duty but the Inglés said that I would be
with him at the bridge and that this would be left to others. At the bridge there will be a
battle and, if I am able to endure the battle, then I will have done all that an old man may
do in this war. But let the Inglés come now, for I am cold and to see the light in the mill
where I know that the Gallegos are warm makes me colder still. I wish that I were in my
own house again and that this war were over. But you have no house now, he thought.
We must win this war before you can ever return to your house.
 Inside the sawmill one of the soldiers was sitting on his bunk and greasing his boots.
Another lay in his bunk sleeping. The third was cooking and the corporal was reading a
paper. Their helmets hung on nails driven into the wall and their rifles leaned against the
plank wall.
 “What kind of country is this where it snows when it is almost June?” the soldier who
was sitting on the bunk said.
 “It is a phenomenon,” the corporal said.
 “We are in the moon of May,” the soldier who was cooking said. “The moon of May
has not yet terminated.”
 “What kind of a country is it where it snows in May?” the soldier on the bunk insisted.
 “In May snow is no rarity in these mountains,” the corporal said. “I have been colder in
Madrid in the month of May than in any other month.”
 “And hotter, too,” the soldier who was cooking said.
 “May is a month of great contrasts in temperature,” the corporal said. “Here, in Castile,
May is a month of great heat but it can have much cold.”
 “Or rain,” the soldier on the bunk said. “In this past May it rained almost every day.”
 “It did not,” the soldier who was cooking said. “And anyway this past May was the
moon of April.”
 “One could go crazy listening to thee and thy moons,” the corporal said. “Leave this of
the moons alone.”
 “Any one who lives either by the sea or by the land knows that it is the moon and not
the month which counts,” the soldier who was cooking said. “Now for example, we have
just started the moon of May. Yet it is coming on June.”
 “Why then do we not get definitely behind in the seasons?” the corporal said. “The
whole proposition gives me a headache.”
 “You are from a town,” the soldier who was cooking said. “You are from Lugo. What
would you know of the sea or of the land?”
 “One learns more in a town than you analfabetos learn in thy sea or thy land.”
“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway 108
 “In this moon the first of the big schools of sardines come,” the soldier who was
cooking said. “In this moon the sardine boats will be outfitting and the mackerel will have
gone north.”
 “Why are you not in the navy if you come from Noya?” the corporal asked.
 “Because I am not inscribed from Noya but from Negreira, where I was born. And from
Negreira, which is up the river Tambre, they take you for the army.”
 “Worse luck,” said the corporal.
 “Do not think the navy is without peril,” the soldier who was sitting on the bunk said.
“Even without the possibility of combat that is a dangerous coast in the winter.”
 “Nothing can be worse than the army,” the corporal said.
 “And you a corporal,” the soldier who was cooking said. “What a way of speaking is
that?”
 “Nay,” the corporal said. “I mean for dangers. I mean the endurance of
bombardments, the necessity to attack, the life of the parapet.”
 “Here we have little of that,” the soldier on the bunk said.
 “By the Grace of God,” the corporal said. “But who knows when we will be subject to it
again? Certainly we will not have something as easy as this forever!”
 “How much longer do you think we will have this detail?”
 “I don’t know,” the corporal said. “But I wish we could have it for all of the war.”
 “Six hours is too long to be on guard,” the soldier who was cooking said.
 “We will have three-hour watches as long as this storm holds,” the corporal said. “That
is only normal.”
 “What about all those staff cars?” the soldier on the bunk asked. “I did not like the look
of all those staff cars.”
 “Nor I,” the corporal said. “All such things are of evil omen.”
 “And aviation,” the soldier who was cooking said. “Aviation is another bad sign.”
 “But we have formidable aviation,” the corporal said. “The Reds have no aviation such
as we have. Those planes this morning were something to make any man happy.”
 “I have seen the Red planes when they were something serious,” the soldier on the
bunk said. “I have seen those two motor bombers when they were a horror to endure.”
 “Yes. But they are not as formidable as our aviation,” the corporal said. “We have an
aviation that is insuperable.”
 This was how they were talking in the sawmill while Anselmo waited in the snow
watching the road and the light in the sawmill window.
 I hope I am not for the killing, Anselmo was thinking. I think that after the war there will
have to be some great penance done for the killing. If we no longer have religion after
the war then I think there must be some form of civic penance organized that all may be
cleansed from the killing or else we will never have a true and human basis for living.
The killing is necessary, I know, but still the doing of it is very bad for a man and I think
that, after all this is over and we have won the war, there must be a penance of some
kind for the cleansing of us all.
 Anselmo was a very good man and whenever he was alone for long, and he was
alone much of the time, this problem of the killing returned to him.
 I wonder about the Inglés, he thought. He told me that he did not mind it. Yet he
seems to be both sensitive and kind. It may be that in the younger people it does not
have an importance. It may be that in foreigners, or in those who have not had our
religion, there is not the same attitude. But I think any one doing it will be brutalized in
time and I think that even though necessary, it is a great sin and that afterwards we
must do something very strong to atone for it.
 It was dark now and he looked at the light across the road and shook his arms against
his chest to warm them. Now, he thought, he would certainly leave for the camp; but
something kept him there beside the tree above the road. It was snowing harder and
Anselmo thought: if only we could blow the bridge tonight. On a night like this it would be
nothing to take the posts and blow the bridge and it would all be over and done with. On
a night like this you could do anything.
“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway 109
 Then he stood there against the tree stamping his feet softly and he did not think any
more about the bridge. The coming of the dark always made him feel lonely and tonight
he felt so lonely that there was a hollowness in him as of hunger. In the old days he
could help this loneliness by the saying of prayers and often coming home from hunting
he would repeat a great number of the same prayer and it made him feel better. But he
had not prayed once since the movement. He missed the prayers but he thought it
would be unfair and hypocritical to say them and he did not wish to ask any favors or for
any different treatment than all the men were receiving.
 No, he thought, I am lonely. But so are all the soldiers and the Wives of all the soldiers
and all those who have lost families or parents. I have no wife, but I am glad that she
died before the movement. She would not have understood it. I have no children and I
never will have any children. I am lonely in the day when I am not working but when the
dark comes it is a time of great loneliness. But one thing I have that no man nor any
God can take from me and that is that I have worked well for the Republic. I have
worked hard for the good that we will all share later. I have worked my best from the first
of the movement and I have done nothing that I am ashamed of.
 All that I am sorry for is the killing. But surely there will be an opportunity to atone for
that because for a sin of that sort that so many bear, certainly some just relief will be
devised. I would like to talk with the Inglés about it but, being young, it is possible that
he might not understand. He mentioned the killing before. Or was it I that mentioned it?
He must have killed much, but he shows no signs of liking it. In those who like it there is
always a rottenness.
 It must really be a great sin, he thought. Because certainly it is the one thing we have
no right to do even though, as I know, it is necessary. But in Spain it is done too lightly
and often without true necessity and there is much quick injustice which, afterward, can
never be repaired. I wish I did not think about it so much, he thought. I wish there were a
penance for it that one could commence now because it is the only thing that I have
done in all my life that makes me feel badly when I am alone. All the other things are
forgiven or one had a chance to atone for them by kindness or in some decent way. But
I think this of the killing must be a very great sin and I would like to fix it up. Later on
there may be certain days that one can work for the state or something that one can do
that will remove it. It will probably be something that one pays as in the days of the
Church, he thought, and smiled. The Church was well organized for sin. That pleased
him and he was smiling in the dark when Robert Jordan came up to him. He came
silently and the old man did not see him until he was there.
 “Hola, viejo,” Robert Jordan whispered and clapped him on the back. “How’s the old
one?”
 “Very cold,” Anselmo said. Fernando was standing a little apart, his back turned
against the driving snow.
 “Come on,” Robert Jordan whispered. “Get on up to camp and get warm. It was a
crime to leave you here so long.”
 “That is their light,” Anselmo pointed.
 “Where’s the sentry?”
 “You do not see him from here. He is around the bend.”
 “The hell with them,” Robert Jordan said. “You tell me at camp. Come on, let’s go.”
 “Let me show you,” Anselmo said.
 “I’m going to look at it in the morning,” Robert Jordan said. “Here, take a swallow of
this.”
 He handed the old man his flask. Anselmo tipped it up and swallowed.
 “Ayee,” he said and rubbed his mouth. “It is fire.”
 “Come on,” Robert Jordan said in the dark. “Let us go.”
 It was so dark now you could only see the flakes blowing past and the rigid dark of the
pine trunks. Fernando was standing a little way up the hill. Look at that cigar store
Indian, Robert Jordan thought. I suppose I have to offer him a drink.
 “Hey, Fernando,” he said as he came up to him. “A swallow?”
“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway 110
 “No,” said Fernando. “Thank you.”
 Thank you, I mean, Robert Jordan thought. I’m glad cigar store Indians don’t drink.
There isn’t too much of that left. Boy, I’m glad to see this old man, Robert Jordan
thought. He looked at Anselmo and then clapped him on the back again as they started
up the hill.
 “I’m glad to see you, viejo,” he said to Anselmo. “If I ever get gloomy, when I see you it
cheers me up. Come on, let’s get up there.”
 They were going up the hill in the snow.
 “Back to the palace of Pablo,” Robert Jordan said to Anselmo. It sounded wonderful in
Spanish.
 “El Palacio del Miedo,” Anselmo said. “The Palace of Fear.”
 “La cueva de los huevos perdidos,” Robert Jordan capped the other happily. “The
cave of the lost eggs.”
 “What eggs?” Fernando asked.
 “A joke,” Robert Jordan said. “Just a joke. Not eggs, you know. The others.”
 “But why are they lost?” Fernando asked.
 “I don’t know,” said Robert Jordan. “Take a book to tell you. Ask Pilar,” then he put his
arm around Anselmo’s shoulder and held him tight as they walked and shook him.
“Listen,” he said. “I’m glad to see you, hear? You don’t know what it means to find
somebody in this country in the same place they were left.”
 It showed what confidence and intimacy he had that he could say anything against the
country.
 “I am glad to see thee,” Anselmo said. “But I was just about to leave.”
 “Like hell you would have,” Robert Jordan said happily. “You’d have frozen first.”
 “How was it up above?” Anselmo asked.
 “Fine,” said Robert Jordan. “Everything is fine.”
 He was very happy with that sudden, rare happiness that can come to any one with a
command in a revolutionary arm; the happiness of finding that even one of your flanks
holds. If both flanks ever held I suppose it would be too much to take, he thought. I don’t
know who is prepared to stand that. And if you extend along a flank, any flank, it
eventually becomes one man. Yes, one man. This was not the axiom he wanted. But
this was a good man. One good man. You are going to be the left flank when we have
the battle, he thought. I better not tell you that yet. It’s going to be an awfully small
battle, he thought. But it’s going to be an awfully good one. Well, I always wanted to
fight one on my own. I always had an opinion on what was wrong with everybody else’s,
from Agincourt down. I will have to make this a good one. It is going to be small but very
select. If I have to do what I think I will have to do it will be very select indeed.
 “Listen,” he said to Anselmo. “I’m awfully glad to see you.”
 “And me to see thee,” the old man said.
 As they went up the hill in the dark, the wind at their backs, the storm blowing past
them as they climbed, Anselmo did not feel lonely. He had not been lonely since the
Inglés had clapped him on the shoulder. The Inglés was pleased and happy and they
joked together. The Inglés said it all went well and he was not worried. The drink in his
stomach warmed him and his feet were warming now climbing.
 “Not much on the road,” he said to the Inglés.
 “Good,” the Inglés told him. “You will show me when we get there.”
 Anselmo was happy now and he was very pleased that he had stayed there at the
post of observation.
 If he had come in to camp it would have been all right. It would have been the
intelligent and correct thing to have done under the circumstances, Robert Jordan was
thinking. But he stayed as he was told, Robert Jordan thought. That’s the rarest thing
that can happen in Spain. To stay in a storm, in a way, corresponds to a lot of things. It’s
not for nothing that the Germans call an attack a storm. I could certainly use a couple
more who would stay. I most certainly could. I wonder if that Fernando would stay. It’s
just possible. After all, he is the one who suggested coming out just now. Do you
“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway 111
suppose he would stay? Wouldn’t that be good? He’s just about stubborn enough. I’ll
have to make some inquiries. Wonder what the old cigar store Indian is thinking about
now.
 “What are you thinking about, Fernando?” Robert Jordan asked.
 “Why do you ask?”
 “Curiosity,” Robert Jordan said. “I am a man of great curiosity.”
 “I was thinking of supper,” Fernando said.
 “Do you like to eat?”
 “Yes. Very much.”
 “How’s Pilar’s cooking?”
 “Average,” Fernando answered.
 He’s a second Coolidge, Robert Jordan thought. But, you know, I have just a hunch
that he would stay.
 The three of them plodded up the hill in the snow.
16
 “El Sordo was here,” Pilar said to Robert Jordan. They had come in out of the storm to
the smoky warmth of the cave and the woman had motioned Robert Jordan over to her
with a nod of her head. “He’s gone to look for horses.”
 “Good. Did he leave any word for me?”
 “Only that he had gone for horses.”
 “And we?”
 “No sé,” she said. “Look at him.”
 Robert Jordan had seen Pablo when he came in and Pablo had grinned at him. Now
he looked over at him sitting at the board table and grinned and waved his hand.
 “Inglés,” Pablo called. “It’s still falling, Inglés.”
 Robert Jordan nodded at him.
 “Let me take thy shoes and dry them,” Maria said. “I will hang them here in the smoke
of the fire.”
 “Watch out you don’t burn them,” Robert Jordan told her. “I don’t want to go around
here barefoot. What’s the matter?” he turned to Pilar. “Is this a meeting? Haven’t you
any sentries out?”
 “In this storm? Qué va.”
 There were six men sitting at the table and leaning back against the wall. Anselmo
and Fernando were still shaking the snow from their jackets, beating their trousers and
rapping their feet against the wall by the entrance.
 “Let me take thy jacket,” Maria said. “Do not let the snow melt on it.”
 Robert Jordan slipped out of his jacket, beat the snow from his trousers, and untied
his shoes.
 “You will get everything wet here,” Pilar said.
 “It was thee who called me.”
 “Still there is no impediment to returning to the door for thy brushing.”
 “Excuse me,” Robert Jordan said, standing in his bare feet on the dirt floor. “Hunt me a
pair of socks, Maria.”
 “The Lord and Master,” Pilar said and poked a piece of wood into the fire.
 “Hay que aprovechar el tiempo,” Robert Jordan told her. “You have to take advantage
of what time there is.”
 “It is locked,” Maria said.
 “Here is the key,” and he tossed it over.
 “It does not fit this sack.”
 “It is the other sack. They are on top and at the side.”
 The girl found the pair of socks, closed the sack, locked it and brought them over with
the key.
 “Sit down and put them on and rub thy feet well,” she said. Robert Jordan grinned at
“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway 112
her.
 “Thou canst not dry them with thy hair?” he said for Pilar to hear.
 “What a swine,” she said. “First he is the Lord of the Manor. Now he is our ex-Lord
Himself. Hit him with a chunk of wood, Maria.”
 “Nay,” Robert Jordan said to her. “I am joking because I am happy.”
 “You are happy?”
 “Yes,” he said. “I think everything goes very well.”
 “Roberto,” Maria said. “Go sit down and dry thy feet and let me bring thee something
to drink to warm thee.”
 “You would think that man had never dampened foot before,” Pilar said. “Nor that a
flake of snow had ever fallen.”
 Maria brought him a sheepskin and put it on the dirt floor of the cave.
 “There,” she said. “Keep that under thee until thy shoes are dry.”
 The sheepskin was fresh dried and not tanned and as Robert Jordan rested his
stocking feet on it he could feel it crackle like parchment.
 The fire was smoking and Pilar called to Maria, “Blow up the fire, worthless one. This
is no smokehouse.”
 “Blow it thyself,” Maria said. “I am searching for the bottle that El Sordo left.”
 “It is behind his packs,” Pilar told her. “Must you care for him as a sucking child?”
 “No,” Maria said. “As a man who is cold and wet. And a man who has just come to his
house. Here it is.” She brought the bottle to where Robert Jordan sat. “It is the bottle of
this noon. With this bottle one could make a beautiful lamp. When we have electricity
again, what a lamp we can make of this bottle.” She looked at the pinch-bottle
admiringly. “How do you take this, Roberto?”
 “I thought I was Inglés,” Robert Jordan said to her.
 “I call thee Roberto before the others,” she said in a low voice and blushed. “How do
you want it, Roberto?”
 “Roberto,” Pablo said thickly and nodded his head at Robert Jordan. “How do you
want it, Don Roberto?”
 “Do you want some?” Robert Jordan asked him.
 Pablo shook his head. “I am making myself drunk with wine,” he said with dignity.
 “Go with Bacchus,” Robert Jordan said in Spanish.
 “Who is Bacchus?” Pablo asked.
 “A comrade of thine,” Robert Jordan said.
 “Never have I heard of him,” Pablo said heavily. “Never in these mountains.”
 “Give a cup to Anselmo,” Robert Jordan said to Maria. “It is he who is cold.” He was
putting on the dry pair of socks and the whiskey and water in the cup tasted clean and
thinly warming. But it does not curl around inside of you the way the absinthe does, he
thought. There is nothing like absinthe.
 Who would imagine they would have whiskey up here, he thought. But La Granja was
the most likely place in Spain to find it when you thought it over. Imagine Sordo getting a
bottle for the visiting dynamiter and then remembering to bring it down and leave it. It
wasn’t just manners that they had. Manners would have been producing the bottle and
having a formal drink. That was what the French would have done and then they would
have saved what was left for another occasion. No, the true thoughtfulness of thinking
the visitor would like it and then bringing it down for him to enjoy when you yourself were
engaged in something where there was every reason to think of no one else but yourself
and of nothing but the matter in hand—that was Spanish. One kind of Spanish, he
thought. Remembering to bring the whiskey was one of the reasons you loved these
people. Don’t go romanticizing them, he thought. There are as many sorts of Spanish as
there are Americans. But still, bringing the whiskey was very handsome.
 “How do you like it?” he asked Anselmo.
 The old man was sitting by the fire with a smile on his face, his big hands holding the
cup. He shook his head.
 “No?” Robert Jordan asked him.
“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway 113
 “The child put water in it,” Anselmo said.
 “Exactly as Roberto takes it,” Maria said. “Art thou something special?”
 “No,” Anselmo told her. “Nothing special at all. But I like to feel it burn as it goes
down.”
 “Give me that,” Robert Jordan told the girl, “and pour him some of that which burns.”
 He tipped the contents of the cup into his own and handed it back empty to the girl,
who poured carefully into it from the bottle.
 “Ah,” Anselmo took the cup, put his head back and let it run down his throat. He
looked at Maria standing holding the bottle and winked at her, tears coming from both
eyes. “That,” he said. “That.” Then he licked his lips. “That is what kills the worm that
haunts us.”
 “Roberto,” Maria said and came over to him, still holding the bottle. “Are you ready to
eat?”
 “Is it ready?”
 “It is ready when you wish it.”
 “Have the others eaten?”
 “All except you, Anselmo and Fernando.”
 “Let us eat then,” he told her. “And thou?”
 “Afterwards with Pilar.”
 “Eat now with us.”
 “No. It would not be well.”
 “Come on and eat. In my country a man does not eat before his woman.”
 “That is thy country. Here it is better to eat after.”
 “Eat with him,” Pablo said, looking up from the table. “Eat with him. Drink with him.
Sleep with him. Die with him. Follow the customs of his country.”
 “Are you drunk?” Robert Jordan said, standing in front of Pablo. The dirty, stubblefaced man looked at him happily.
 “Yes,” Pablo said. “Where is thy country, Inglés, where the women eat with the men?”
 “In Estados Unidos in the state of Montana.”
 “Is it there that the men wear skirts as do the women?”
 “No. That is in Scotland.”
 “But listen,” Pablo said. “When you wear skirts like that, Inglés—”
 “I don’t wear them,” Robert Jordan said.
 “When you are wearing those skirts,” Pablo went on, “what do you wear under them?”
 “I don’t know what the Scotch wear,” Robert Jordan said. “I’ve wondered myself.”
 “Not the Escoceses,” Pablo said. “Who cares about the Escoceses? Who cares about
anything with a name as rare as that? Not me. I don’t care. You, I say, Inglés. You.
What do you wear under your skirts in your country?”
 “Twice I have told you that we do not wear skirts,” Robert Jordan said. “Neither drunk
nor in joke.”
 “But under your skirts,” Pablo insisted. “Since it is well known that you wear skirts.
Even the soldiers. I have seen photographs and also I have seen them in the Circus of
Price. What do you wear under your skirts, Inglés?”
 “Los cojones,” Robert Jordan said.
 Anselmo laughed and so did the others who were listening; all except Fernando. The
sound of the word, of the gross word spoken before the women, was offensive to him.
 “Well, that is normal,” Pablo said. “But it seems to me that with enough cojones you
would not wear skirts.”
 “Don’t let him get started again, Inglés,” the flat-faced man with the broken nose who
was called Primitivo said. “He is drunk. Tell me, what do they raise in your country?”
 “Cattle and sheep,” Robert Jordan said. “Much grain also and beans. And also much
beets for sugar.”
 The three were at the table now and the others sat close by except Pablo, who sat by
himself in front of a bowl of the wine. It was the same stew as the night before and
Robert Jordan ate it hungrily.
“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway 114
 “In your country there are mountains? With that name surely there are mountains,”
Primitivo asked politely to make conversation. He was embarrassed at the drunkenness
of Pablo.
 “Many mountains and very high.”
 “And are there good pastures?”
 “Excellent; high pasture in the summer in forests controlled by the government. Then
in the fall the cattle are brought down to the lower ranges.”
 “Is the land there owned by the peasants?”
 “Most land is owned by those who farm it. Originally the land was owned by the state
and by living on it and declaring the intent~on of improving it, a man could obtain a title
to a hundred and fifty hectares.”
 “Tell me how this is done,” Agustín asked. “That is an agrarian reform which means
something.”
 Robert Jordan explained the process of homesteading. He had never thought of it
before as an agrarian reform.
 “That is magnificent,” Primitivo said. “Then you have a communism in your country?”
 “No. That is done under the Republic.”
 “For me,” Agustín said, “everything can be done under the Republic. I see no need for
other form of government.”
 “Do you have no big proprietors?” Andrés asked.
 “Many.”
 “Then there must be abuses.”
 “Certainly. There are many abuses.”
 “But you will do away with them?”
 “We try to more and more. But there are many abuses still.”
 “But there are not great estates that must be broken up?”
 “Yes. But there are those who believe that taxes will break them up.”
 “How?”
 Robert Jordan, wiping out the stew bowl with bread, explained how the income tax
and inheritance tax worked. “But the big estates remain. Also there are taxes on the
land,” he said.
 “But surely the big proprietors and the rich will make a revolution against such taxes.
Such taxes appear to me to be revolutionary. They will revolt against the government
when they see that they are threatened, exactly as the fascists have done here,”
Primitivo said.
 “It is possible.”
 “Then you will have to fight in your country as we fight here.”
 “Yes, we will have to fight.”
 “But are there not many fascists in your country?”
 “There are many who do not know they are fascists but will find it out when the time
comes.”
 “But you cannot destroy them until they rebel?”
 “No,” Robert Jordan said. “We cannot destroy them. But we can educate the people
so that they will fear fascism and recognize it as it appears and combat it.”
 “Do you know where there are no fascists?” Andrés asked.
 “Where?”
 “In the town of Pablo,” Andrés said and grinned.
 “You know what was done in that village?” Primitivo asked Robert Jordan.
 “Yes. I have heard the story.”
 “From Pilar?”
 “Yes.”
 “You could not hear all of it from the woman,” Pablo said heavily. “Because she did not
see the end of it because she fell from a chair outside of the window.”
 “You tell him what happened then,” Pilar said. “Since I know not the story, let you tell
it.”
“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway 115
 “Nay,” Pablo said. “I have never told it.”
 “No,” Pilar said. “And you will not tell it. And now you wish it had not happened.”
 “No,” Pablo said. “That is not true. And if all had killed the fascists as I did we would
not have this war. But I would not have had it happen as it happened.”
 “Why do you say that?” Primitivo asked him. “Are you changing your politics?”
 “No. But it was barbarous,” Pablo said. “In those days I was very barbarous.”
 “And now you are drunk,” Pilar said.
 “Yes,” Pablo said. “With your permission.”
 “I liked you better when you were barbarous,” the woman said. “Of all men the
drunkard is the foulest. The thief when he is not stealing is like another. The extortioner
does not practise in the home. The murderer when he is at home can wash his hands.
But the drunkard stinks and vomits in his own bed and dissolves his organs in alcohol.”
 “You are a woman and you do not understand,” Pablo said equably. “I am drunk on
wine and I would be happy except for those people I have killed. All of them fill me with
sorrow.” He shook his head lugubriously.
 “Give him some of that which Sordo brought,” Pilar said. “Give him something to
animate him. He is becoming too sad to bear.”
 “If I could restore them to life, I would,” Pablo said.
 “Go and obscenity thyself,” Agustín said to him. “What sort of place is this?”
 “I would bring them all back to life,” Pablo said sadly. “Every one.”
 “Thy mother,” Agustín shouted at him. “Stop talking like this or get out. Those were
fascists you killed.”
 “You heard me,” Pablo said. “I would restore them all to life.”
 “And then you would walk on the water,” Pilar said. “In my life I have never seen such
a man. Up until yesterday you preserved some remnants of manhood. And today there
is not enough of you left to make a sick kitten. Yet you are happy in your soddenness.”
 “We should have killed all or none,” Pablo nodded his head. “All or none.”
 “Listen, Inglés,” Agustín said. “How did you happen to come to Spain? Pay no
attention to Pablo. He is drunk.”
 “I came first twelve years ago to study the country and the language,” Robert Jordan
said. “I teach Spanish in a university.”
 “You look very little like a professoi” Primitivo said.
 “He has no beard,” Pablo said. “Look at him. He has no beard.”
 “Are you truly a professor?”
 “An instructor.”
 “But you teach?”
 “Yes.”
 “But why Spanish?” Andrés asked. “Would it not be easier to teach English since you
are English?”
 “He speaks Spanish as we do,” Anselmo said. “Why should he not teach Spanish?”
 “Yes. But it is, in a way, presumptuous for a foreigner to teach Spanish,” Fernando
said. “I mean nothing against you, Don Roberto.”
 “He’s a false professor,” Pablo said, very pleased with himself. “He hasn’t got a
beard.”
 “Surely you know English better,” Fernando said. “Would it not be better and easier
and clearer to teach English?”
 “He doesn’t teach it to Spaniards—” Pilar started to intervene.
 “I should hope not,” Fernando said.
 “Let me finish, you mule,” Pilar said to him. “He teaches Spanish to Americans. North
Americans.”
 “Can they not speak Spanish?” Fernando asked. “South Americans can.”
 “Mule,” Pilar said. “He teaches Spanish to North Americans who speak English.”
 “Still and all I think it would be easier for him to teach English if that is what he
speaks,” Fernando said.
 “Can’t you hear he speaks Spanish?” Pilar shook her head hopelessly at Robert
“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway 116
Jordan.
 “Yes. But with an accent.”
 “Of where?” Robert Jordan asked.
 “Of Estremadura,” Fernando said primly.
 “Oh my mother,” Pilar said. “What a people!”
 “It is possible,” Robert Jordan said. “I have come here from there.”
 “As he well knows,” Pilar said. “You old maid,” she turned to Fernando. “Have you had
enough to eat?”
 “I could eat more if there is a sufficient quantity,” Fernando told her. “And do not think
that I wish to say anything against you, Don Roberto—”
 “Milk,” Agustín said simply. “And milk again. Do we make the revolution in order to say
Don Roberto to a comrade?”
 “For me the revolution is so that all will say Don to all,” Fernando said. “Thus should it
be under the Republic.”
 “Milk,” Agustín said. “Black milk.”
 “And I still think it would be easier and clearer for Don Roberto to teach English.”
 “Don Roberto has no beard,” Pablo said. “He is a false professor.”
 “What do you mean, I have no beard?” Robert Jordan said. “What’s this?” He stroked
his chin and his cheeks where the threeday growth made a blond stubble.
 “Not a beard,” Pablo said. He shook his head. “That’s not a beard.” He was almost
jovial now. “He’s a false professor.”
 “I obscenity in the milk of all,” Agustín said, “if it does not seem like a lunatic asylum
here.”
 “You should drink,” Pablo said to him. “To me everything appears normal. Except the
lack of beard of Don Roberto.”
 Maria ran her hand over Robert Jordan’s cheek.
 “He has a beard,” she said to Pablo.
 “You should know,” Pablo said and Robert Jordan looked at him.
 I don’t think he is so drunk, Robert Jordan thought. No, not so drunk. And I think I had
better watch myself.
 “Thou,” he said to Pablo. “Do you think this snow will last?”
 “What do you think?”
 “I asked you.”
 “Ask another,” Pablo told him. “I am not thy service of information. You have a paper
from thy service of information. Ask the woman. She commands.”
 “I asked thee.”
 “Go and obscenity thyself,” Pablo told him. “Thee and the woman and the girl.”
 “He is drunk,” Primitivo said. “Pay him no heed, Inglés.”
 “I do not think he is so drunk,” Robert Jordan said.
 Maria was standing behind him and Robert Jordan saw Pablo watching her over his
shoulder. The small eyes, like a boar’s, were watching her out of the round, stubblecovered head and Robert Jordan thought: I have known many killers in this war and
some before and they were all different; there is no common trait nor feature; nor any
such thing as the criminal type; but Pablo is certainly not handsome.
 “I don’t believe you can drink,” he said to Pablo. “Nor that you’re drunk.”
 “I am drunk,” Pablo said with dignity. “To drink is nothing. It is to be drunk that is
important. Estoy muy borracho.”
 “I doubt it,” Robert Jordan told him. “Cowardly, yes.”
 It was so quiet in the cave, suddenly, that he could hear the hissing noise the wood
made burning on the hearth where Pilar cooked. He heard the sheepskin crackle as he
rested his weight on his feet. He thought he could almost hear the snow falling outside.
He could not, but he could hear the silence where it fell.
 I’d like to kill him and have it over with, Robert Jordan was thinking. I don’t know what
he is going to do, but it is nothing good. Day after tomorrow is the bridge and this man is
bad and he constitutes a danger to the success of the whole enterprise. Come on. Let
“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway 117
us get it over with.
 Pablo grinned at him and put one finger up and wiped it across his throat. He shook
his head that turned only a little each way on his thick, short neck.
 “Nay, Inglés,” he said. “Do not provoke me.” He looked at Pilar and said to her, “It is
not thus that you get rid of me.”
 “Sinverguenza,” Robert Jordan said to him, committed now in his own mind to the
action. “Cobarde.”
 “It is very possible,” Pablo said. “But I am not to be provoked. Take something to drink,
Inglés, and signal to the woman it was not successful.”
 “Shut thy mouth,” Robert Jordan said. “I provoke thee for myself.”
 “It is not worth the trouble,” Pablo told him. “I do not provoke.”
 “Thou art a bicho raro,” Robert Jordan said, not wanting to let it go; not wanting to
have it fail for the second time; knowing as he spoke that this had all been gone through
before; having that feeling that he was playing a part from memory of something that he
had read or had dreamed, feeling it all moving in a circle.
 “Very rare, yes,” Pablo said. “Very rare and very drunk. To your health, Inglés.” He
dipped a cup in the wine bowl and held it up. “Salud y cojones.”
 He’s rare, all right, Robert Jordan thought, and smart, and very complicated. He could
no longer hear the fire for the sound of his own breathing.
 “Here’s to you,” Robert Jordan said, and dipped a cup into the wine. Betrayal wouldn’t
amount to anything without all these pledges, he thought. Pledge up. “Salud,” he said.
“Salud and Salud again,” you salud, he thought. Salud, you salud.
 “Don Roberto,” Pablo said heavily.
 “Don Pablo,” Robert Jordan said.
 “You’re no professor,” Pablo said, “because you haven’t got a beard. And also to do
away with me you have to assassinate me and, for this, you have not cojones.”
 He was looking at Robert Jordan with his mouth closed so that his lips made a tight
line, like the mouth of a fish, Robert Jordan thought. With that head it is like one of those
porcupine fish that swallow air and swell up after they are caught.
 “Salud, Pablo,” Robert Jordan said and raised the cup up and drank from it. “I am
learning much from thee.”
 “I am teaching the professor,” Pablo nodded his head. “Come on, Don Roberto, we will
be friends.”
 “We are friends already,” Robert Jordan said.
 “But now we will be good friends.”
 “We are good friends already.”
 “I’m going to get out of here,” Agustín said. “Truly, it is said that we must eat a ton of it
in this life but I have twenty-five pounds of it stuck in each of my ears this minute.”
 “What is the matter, negro?” Pablo said to him. “Do you not like to see friendship
between Don Roberto and me?”
 “Watch your mouth about calling me negro.” Agustín went over to him and stood in
front of Pablo holding his hands low.
 “So you are called,” Pablo said.
 “Not by thee.”
 “Well, then, blanco—”
 “Nor that, either.”
 “What are you then, Red?”
 “Yes. Red. Rojo. With the Red star of the army and in favor of the Republic. And my
name is Agustín.”
 “What a patriotic man,” Pablo said. “Look, Inglés, what an exemplary patriot.”
 Agustín hit him hard across the mouth with his left hand, bringing it forward in a
slapping, backhand sweep. Pablo sat there. The corners of his mouth were wine-stained
and his expression did not change, but Robert Jordan watched his eyes narrow, as a
cat’s pupils close to vertical slits in a strong light.
 “Nor this,” Pablo said. “Do not count on this, woman.” He turned his head toward Pilar.
“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway 118
“I am not provoked.”
 Agustín hit him again. This time he hit him on the mouth with his closed fist. Robert
Jordan was holding his pistol in his hand under the table. He had shoved the safety
catch off and he pushed Maria away with his left hand. She moved a little way and he
pushed her hard in the ribs with his left hand again to make her get really away. She
was gone now and he saw her from the corner of his eye, slipping along the side of the
cave toward the fire and now Robert Jordan watched Pablo’s face.
 The round-headed man sat staring at Agustín from his flat little eyes. The pupils were
even smaller now. He licked his lips then, put up an arm and wiped his mouth with the
back of his hand, looked down and saw the blood on his hand. He ran his tongue over
his lips, then spat.
 “Nor that,” he said. “I am not a fool. I do not provoke.”
 “Cabrón,” Agustín said.
 “You should know,” Pablo said. “You know the woman.”
 Agustín hit him again hard in the mouth and Pablo laughed at him, showing the yellow,
bad, broken teeth in the reddened line of his mouth.
 “Leave it alone,” Pablo said and reached with a cup to scoop some wine from the
bowl. “Nobody here has cojones to kill me and this of the hands is silly.”
 “Cobarde,” Agustín said.
 “Nor words either,” Pablo said and made a swishing noise rinsing the wine in his
mouth. He spat on the floor. “I am far past words.”
 Agustín stood there looking down at him and cursed him, speaking slowly, clearly,
bitterly and contemptuously and cursing as steadily as though he were dumping manure
on a field, lifting it with a dung fork out of a wagon.
 “Nor of those,” Pablo said. “Leave it, Agustín. And do not hit me more. Thou wilt injure
thy hands.”
 Agustín turned from him and went to the door.
 “Do not go out,” Pablo said. “It is snowing outside. Make thyself comfortable in here.”
 “And thou! Thou!” Agustín turned from the door and spoke to him, putting all his
contempt in the single, “Tu.”
 “Yes, me,” said Pablo. “I will be alive when you are dead.”
 He dipped up another cup of wine and raised it to Robert Jordan. “To the professor,”
he said. Then turned to Pilar. “To the Señora Commander.” Then toasted them all, “To
all the illusioned ones.”
 Agustín walked over to him and, striking quickly with the side of his hand, knocked the
cup out of his hand.
 “That is a waste,” Pablo said. “That is silly.”
 Agustín said something vile to him.
 “No,” Pablo said, dipping up another cup. “I am drunk, seest thou? When I am not
drunk I do not talk. You have never heard me talk much. But an intelligent man is
sometimes forced to be drunk to spend his time with fools.”
 “Go and obscenity in the milk of thy cowardice,” Pilar said to him. “I know too much
about thee and thy cowardice.”
 “How the woman talks,” Pablo said. “I will be going out to see the horses.”
 “Go and befoul them,” Agustín said. “Is not that one of thy customs?”
 “No,” Pablo said and shook his head. He was taking down his big blanket cape from
the wall and he looked at Agustín. “Thou,” he said, “and thy violence.”
 “What do you go to do with the horses?” Agustín said.
 “Look to them,” Pablo said.
 “Befoul them,” Agustín said. “Horse lover.”
 “I care for them very much,” Pablo said. “Even from behind they are handsomer and
have more sense than these people. Divert yourselves,” he said and grinned. “Speak to
them of the bridge, Inglés. Explain their duties in the attack. Tell them how to conduct
the retreat. Where will you take them, Inglés, after the bridge? Where will you take your
patriots? I have thought of it all day while I have been drinking.”
“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway 119
 “What have you thought?” Agustín asked.
 “What have I thought?” Pablo said and moved his tongue around exploringly inside his
lips. “Qué te importa, what have I thought.”
 “Say it,” Agustín said to him.
 “Much,” Pablo said. He pulled the blanket coat over his head, the roundness of his
head protruding now from the dirty yellow folds of the blanket. “I have thought much.”
 “What?” Agustín said. “What?”
 “I have thought you are a group of illusioned people,” Pablo said. “Led by a woman
with her brains between her thighs and a foreigner who comes to destroy you.”
 “Get out,” Pilar shouted at him. “Get out and fist yourself into the snow. Take your bad
milk out of here, you horse exhausted maricon.”
 “Thus one talks,” Agustín said admiringly, but absent-mindedly. He was worried.
 “I go,” said Pablo. “But I will be back shortly.” He lifted the blanket over the door of the
cave and stepped out. Then from the door he called, “It’s still falling, Inglés.”
17
 The only noise in the cave now was the hissing from the hearth where snow was
falling through the hole in the roof onto the coals of the fire.
 “Pilar,” Fernando said. “Is there more of the stew?”
 “Oh, shut up,” the woman said. But Maria took Fernando’s bowl over to the big pot set
back from the edge of the fire and ladled into it. She brought it over to the table and set
it down and then patted Fernando on the shoulder as he bent to eat. She stood for a
moment beside him, her hand on his shoulder. But Fernando did not look up. He was
devoting himself to the stew.
 Agustín stood beside the fire. The others were seated. Pilar sat at the table opposite
Robert Jordan.
 “Now, Inglés,” she said, “you have seen how he is.”
 “What will he do?” Robert Jordan asked.
 “Anything,” the woman looked down at the table. “Anything. He is capable of doing
anything.”
 “Where is the automatic rifle?” Robert Jordan asked.
 “There in the corner wrapped in the blanket,” Primitivo said. “Do you want it?”
 “Later,” Robert Jordan said. “I wished to know where it is.”
 “It is there,” Primitivo said. “I brought it in and I have wrapped it in my blanket to keep
the action dry. The pans are in that sack.”
 “He would not do that,” Pilar said. “He would not do anything with the máquina.”
 “I thought you said he would do anything.”
 “He might,” she said. “But he has no practice with the máquina. He could toss in a
bomb. That is more his style.”
 “It is an idiocy and a weakness not to have killed him,” the gypsy said. He had taken
no part in any of the talk all evening. “Last night Roberto should have killed him.”
 “Kill him,” Pilar said. Her big face was dark and tired looking. “I am for it now.”
 “I was against it,” Agustín said. He stood in front of the fire, his long arms hanging by
his sides, his cheeks, stubble-shadowed below the cheekbones, hollow in the firelight.
“Now I am for it,” he said. “He is poisonous now and he would like to see us all
destroyed.”
 “Let all speak,” Pilar said and her voice was tired. “Thou, Andrés?”
 “Matarlo,” the brother with the dark hair growing far down in the point on his forehead
said and nodded his head.
 “Eladio?”
 “Equally,” the other brother said. “To me he seems to constitute a great danger. And
he serves for nothing.”
 “Primitivo?”
 “Equally.”
“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway 120
 “Fernando?”
 “Could we not hold him as a prisoner?” Fernando asked.
 “Who would look after a prisoner?” Primitivo said. “It would take two men to look after
a prisoner and what would we do with him in the end?”
 “We could sell him to the fascists,” the gypsy said.
 “None of that,” Agustín said. “None of that filthiness.”
 “It was only an idea,” Rafael, the gypsy, said. “It seems to me that the facciosos would
be happy to have him.”
 “Leave it alone,” Agustín said. “That is filthy.”
 “No filthier than Pablo,” the gypsy justified himself.
 “One filthiness does not justify another,” Agustín said. “Well, that is all. Except for the
old man and the Inglés.”
 “They are not in it,” Pilar said. “He has not been their leader.”
 “One moment,” Fernando said. “I have not finished.”
 “Go ahead,” Pilar said. “Talk until he comes back. Talk until he rolls a hand grenade
under that blanket and blows this all up. Dynamite and all.”
 “I think that you exaggerate, Pilar,” Fernando said. “I do not think that he has any such
conception.”
 “I do not think so either,” Agustín said. “Because that would blow the wine up too and
he will be back in a little while to the wine.”
 “Why not turn him over to El Sordo and let El Sordo sell him to the fascists?” Rafael
suggested. “You could blind him and he would be easy to handle.”
 “Shut up,” Pilar said. “I feel something very justified against thee too when thou
talkest.”
 “The fascists would pay nothing for him anyway,” Primitivo said. “Such things have
been tried by others and they pay nothing. They will shoot thee too.”
 “I believe that blinded he could be sold for something,” Rafael said.
 “Shut up,” Pilar said. “Speak of blinding again and you can go with the other.”
 “But, he, Pablo, blinded the guardia civil who was wounded,” the gypsy insisted. “You
have forgotten that?”
 “Close thy mouth,” Pilar said to him. She was embarrassed before Robert Jordan by
this talk of blinding.
 “I have not been allowed to finish,” Fernando interrupted.
 “Finish,” Pilar told him. “Go on. Finish.”
 “Since it is impractical to hold Pablo as a prisoner,” Fernando commenced, “and since
it is repugnant to offer him—”
 “Finish,” Pilar said. “For the love of God, finish.”
 “—in any class of negotiation,” Fernando proceeded calmly, “I am agreed that it is
perhaps best that he should be eliminated in order that the operations projected should
be insured of the maximum possibility of success.”
 Pilar looked at the little man, shook her head, bit her lips and said nothing.
 “That is my opinion,” Fernando said. “I believe we are justified in believing that he
constitutes a danger to the Republic—”
 “Mother of God,” Pilar said. “Even here one man can make a bureaucracy with his
mouth.”
 “Both from his own words and his recent actions,” Fernando continued. “And while he
is deserving of gratitude for his actions in the early part of the movement and up until the
most recent time—”
 Pilar had walked over to the fire. Now she came up to the table.
 “Fernando,” Pilar said quietly and handed a bowl to him. “Take this stew please in all
formality and fill thy mouth with it and talk no more. We are in possession of thy
opinion.”
 “But, how then—” Primitivo asked and paused without completing the sentence.
 “Estoy listo,” Robert Jordan said. “I am ready to do it. Since you are all decided that it
should be done it is a service that I can do.”
“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway 121
 What’s the matter? he thought. From listening to him I am beginning to talk like
Fernando. That language must be infectious. French, the language of diplomacy.
Spanish, the language of bureaucracy.
 “No,” Maria said. “No.”
 “This is none of thy business,” Pilar said to the girl. “Keep thy mouth shut.”
 “I will do it tonight,” Robert Jordan said.
 He saw Pilar looking at him, her fingers on her lips. She was looking toward the door.
 The blanket fastened across the opening of the cave was lifted and Pablo put his head
in. He grinned at them all, pushed under the blanket and then turned and fastened it
again. He turned around and stood there, then pulled the blanket cape over his head
and shook the snow from it.
 “You were speaking of me?” he addressed them all. “I am interrupting?”
 No one answered him and he hung the cape on a peg in the wall and walked over to
the table.
 “Qué tal?” he asked and picked up his cup which had stood empty on the table and
dipped it into the wine bowl. “There is no wine,” he said to Maria. “Go draw some from
the skin.”
 Maria picked up the bowl and went over to the dusty, heavily distended, black-tarred
wineskin that hung neck down from the wall and unscrewed the plug from one of the
legs enough so that the wine squirted from the edge of the plug into the bowl. Pablo
watched her kneeling, holding the bowl up and watched the light red wine flooding into
the bowl so fast that it made a whirling motion as it filled it.
 “Be careful,” he said to her. “The wine’s below the chest now.”
 No one said anything.
 “I drank from the belly-button to the chest today,” Pablo said. “It’s a day’s work. What’s
the matter with you all? Have you lost your tongues?”
 No one said anything at all.
 “Screw it up, Maria,” Pablo said. “Don’t let it spill.”
 “There’ll be plenty of wine,” Agustín said. “You’ll be able to be drunk.”
 “One has encountered his tongue,” Pablo said and nodded to Agustín. “Felicitations. I
thought you’d been struck dumb.”
 “By what?” Agustín asked.
 “By my entry.”
 “Thinkest thou that thy entry carries importance?”
 He’s working himself up to it, maybe, Robert Jordan thought. Maybe Agustín is going
to do it. He certainly hates him enough. I don’t hate him, he thought. No, I don’t hate
him. He is disgusting but I do not hate him. Though that blinding business puts him in a
special class. Still this is their war. But he is certainly nothing to have around for the next
two days. I am going to keep away out of it, he thought. I made a fool of myself with him
once tonight and I am perfectly willing to liquidate him. But I am not going to fool with
him beforehand. And there are not going to be any shooting matches or monkey
business in here with that dynamite around either. Pablo thought of that, of course. And
did you think of it, he said to himself? No, you did not and neither did Agustín. You
deserve whatever happens to you, he thought.
 “Agustín,” he said.
 “What?” Agustín looked up sullenly and turned his head away from Pablo.
 “I wish to speak to thee,” Robert Jordan said.
 “Later.”
 “Now,” Robert Jordan said. “Por favor.”
 Robert Jordan had walked to the opening of the cave and Pablo followed him with his
eyes. Agustín, tall and sunken cheeked, stood up and came over to him. He moved
reluctantly and contemptuously.
 “Thou hast forgotten what is in the sacks?” Robert Jordan said to him, speaking so low
that it could not be heard.
 “Milk!” Agustín said. “One becomes accustomed and one forgets.”
“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway 122
 “I, too, forgot.”
 “Milk!” Agustín said. “Leche! What fools we are.” He swung back loose-jointedly to the
table and sat down. “Have a drink, Pablo, old boy,” he said. “How were the horses?”
 “Very good,” Pablo said. “And it is snowing less.”
 “Do you think it will stop?”
 “Yes,” Pablo said. “It is thinning now and there are small, hard pellets. The wind will
blow but the snow is going. The wind has changed.”
 “Do you think it will clear tomorrow?” Robert Jordan asked him.
 “Yes,” Pablo said. “I believe it will be cold and clear. This wind is shifting.”
 Look at him, Robert Jordan thought. Now he is friendly. He has shifted like the wind.
He has the face and the body of a pig and I know he is many times a murderer and yet
he has the sensitivity of a good aneroid. Yes, he thought, and the pig is a very intelligent
animal, too. Pablo has hatred for us, or perhaps it is only for our projects, and pushes
his hatred with insults to the point where you are ready to do away with him and when
he sees that this point has been reached he drops it and starts all new and clean again.
 “We will have good weather for it, Inglés,” Pablo said to Robert Jordan.
 “We,” Pilar said. “We?”
 “Yes, we,” Pablo grinned at her and drank some of the wine. “Why not? I thought it
over while I was outside. Why should we not agree?”
 “In what?” the woman asked. “In what now?”
 “In all,” Pablo said to her. “In this of the bridge. I am with thee now.”
 “You are with us now?” Agustín said to him. “After what you have said?”
 “Yes,” Pablo told him. “With the change of the weather I am with thee.”
 Agustín shook his head. “The weather,” he said and shook his head again. “And after
me hitting thee in the face?”
 “Yes,” Pablo grinned at him and ran his fingers over his lips. “After that too.”
 Robert Jordan was watching Pilar. She was looking at Pablo as at some strange
animal. On her face there was still a shadow of the expression the mention of the
blinding had put there. She shook her head as though to be rid of that, then tossed it
back. “Listen,” she said to Pablo.
 “Yes, woman.”
 “What passes with thee?”
 “Nothing,” Pablo said. “I have changed my opinion. Nothing more.”
 “You were listening at the door,” she told him.
 “Yes,” he said. “But I could hear nothing.”
 “You fear that we will kill thee.”
 “No,” he told her and looked at her over the wine cup. “I do not fear that. You know
that.”
 “Well, what passes with thee?” Agustín said. “One moment you are drunk and putting
your mouth on all of us and disassociating yourself from the work in hand and speaking
of our death in a dirty manner and insulting the women and opposing that which should
be done—”
 “I was drunk,” Pablo told him.
 “And now—”
 “I am not drunk,” Pablo said. “And I have changed my mind.”
 “Let the others trust thee. I do not,” Agustín said.
 “Trust me or not,” Pablo said. “But there is no one who can take thee to Gredos as I
can.”
 “Gredos?”
 “It is the only place to go after this of the bridge.”
 Robert Jordan, looking at Pilar, raised his hand on the side away from Pablo and
tapped his right ear questioningly.
 The woman nodded. Then nodded again. She said something to Maria and the girl
came over to Robert Jordan’s side.
 “She says, ‘Of course he heard,” Maria said in Robert Jordan’s ear.
“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway 123
 “Then Pablo,” Fernando said judicially. “Thou art with us now and in favor of this of the
bridge?”
 “Yes, man,” Pablo said. He looked Fernando squarely in the eye and nodded.
 “In truth?” Primitivo asked.
 “De veras,” Pablo told him.
 “And you think it can be successful?” Fernando asked. “You now have confidence?”
 “Why not?” Pablo said. “Haven’t you confidence?”
 “Yes,” Fernando said. “But I always have confidence.”
 “I’m going to get out of here,” Agustín said.
 “It is cold outside,” Pablo told him in a friendly tone.
 “Maybe,” Agustín said. “But I can’t stay any longer in this manicomio.”
 “Do not call this cave an insane asylum,” Fernando said.
 “A manicomio for criminal lunatics,” Agustín said. “And I’m getting out before I’m crazy,
too.”
18
 It is like a merry-go-round, Robert Jordan thought. Not a merry-goround that travels
fast, and with a calliope for music, and the children ride on cows with gilded horns, and
there are rings to catch with sticks, and there is the blue, gas-flare-lit early dark of the
Avenue du Maine, with fried fish sold from the next stall, and a wheel of fortune turning
with the leather flaps slapping against the posts of the numbered compartments, and the
packages of lump sugar piled in pyramids for prizes. No, it is not that kind of a merrygoround; although the people are waiting, like the men in caps and the women in knitted
sweaters, their heads bare in the gaslight and their hair shining, who stand in front of the
wheel of fortune as it spins. Yes, those are the people. But this is another wheel. This is
like a wheel that goes up and around.
 It has been around twice now. It is a vast wheel, set at an angle, and each time it goes
around and then is back to where it starts. One side is higher than the other and the
sweep it makes lifts you back and down to where you started. There are no prizes
either, he thought, and no one would choose to ride this wheel. You ride it each time
and make the turn with no intention ever to have mounted. There is only one turn; one
large, elliptical, rising and falling turn and you are back where you have started. We are
back again now, he thought, and nothing is settled.
 It was warm in the cave and the wind had dropped outside. Now he was sitting at the
table with his notebook in front of him figuring all the technical part of the bridge-blowing.
He drew three sketches, figured his formulas, marked the method of blowing with two
drawings as clearly as a kindergarten project so that Anselmo could complete it in case
anything should happen to himself during the process of the demolition. He finished
these sketches and studied them.
 Maria sat beside him and looked over his shoulder while he worked. He was
conscious of Pablo across the table and of the others talking and playing cards and he
smelled the odors of the cave which had changed now from those of the meal and the
cooking to the fire smoke and man smell, the tobacco, red-wine and brassy, stale body
smell, and when Maria, watching him finishing a drawing, put her hand on the table he
picked it up with his left hand and lifted it to his face and smelled the coarse soap and
water freshness from her washing of the dishes. He laid her hand down without looking
at her and went on working and he could not see her blush. She let her hand lie there,
close to his, but he did not lift it again.
 Now he had finished the demolition project and he took a new page of the notebook
and commenced to write out the operation orders. He was thinking clearly and well on
these and what he wrote pleased him. He wrote two pages in the notebook and read
them over carefully.
 I think that is all, he said to himself. It is perfectly clear and I do not think there are any
holes in it. The two posts will be destroyed and the bridge will be blown according to
“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway 124
Golz’s orders and that is all of my responsibility. All of this business of Pablo is
something with which I should never have been saddled and it will be solved one way or
another. There will be Pablo or there will be no Pablo. I care nothing about it either way.
But I am not going to get on that wheel again. Twice I have been on that wheel and
twice it has gone around and come back to where it started and I am taking no more
rides on it.
 He shut the notebook and looked up at Maria. “Hola, guapa,” he said to her. “Did you
make anything out of all that?”
 “No, Roberto,” the girl said and put her hand on his hand that still held the pencil.
“Have you finished?”
 “Yes. Now it is all written out and ordered.”
 “What have you been doing, Inglés?” Pablo asked from across the table. His eyes
were bleary again.
 Robert Jordan looked at him closely. Stay off that wheel, he said to himself. Don’t step
on that wheel. I think it is going to start to swing again.
 “Working on the problem of the bridge,” he said civilly.
 “How is it?” asked Pablo.
 “Very good,” Robert Jordan said. “All very good.”
 “I have been working on the problem of the retreat,” Pablo said and Robert Jordan
looked at his drunken pig eyes and at the wine bowl. The wine bowl was nearly empty.
 Keep off the wheel, he told himself. He is drinking again. Sure. But don’t you get on
that wheel now. Wasn’t Grant supposed to be drunk a good part of the time during the
Civil War? Certainly he was. I’ll bet Grant would be furious at the comparison if he could
see Pablo. Grant was a cigar smoker, too. Well, he would have to see about getting
Pablo a cigar. That was what that face really needed to complete it; a half chewed cigar.
Where could he get Pablo a cigar?
 “How does it go?” Robert Jordan asked politely.
 “Very well,” Pablo said and nodded his head heavily and judiciously. “Muy bien.”
 “You’ve thought up something?” Agustín asked from where they were playing cards.
 “Yes,” Pablo said. “Various things.”
 “Where did you find them? In that bowl?” Agustín demanded.
 “Perhaps,” Pablo said. “Who knows? Maria, fill the bowl, will you, please?”
 “In the wineskin itself there should be some fine ideas,” Agustín turned back to the
card game. “Why don’t you crawl in and look for them inside the skin?”
 “Nay,” said Pablo equably. “I search for them in the bowl.”
 He is not getting on the wheel either, Robert Jordan thought. It must be revolving by
itself. I suppose you cannot ride that wheel too long. That is probably quite a deadly
wheel. I’m glad we are off of it. It was making me dizzy there a couple of times. But it is
the thing that drunkards and those who are truly mean or cruel ride until they die. It goes
around and up and the swing is never quite the same and then it comes around down.
Let it swing, he thought. They will not get me onto it again. No sir, General Grant, I am
off that wheel.
 Pilar was sitting by the fire, her chair turned so that she could see over the shoulders
of the two card players who had their backs to her. She was watching the game.
 Here it is the shift from deadliness to normal family life that is the strangest, Robert
Jordan thought. It is when the damned wheel comes down that it gets you. But I am off
that wheel, he thought. And nobody is going to get me onto it again.
 Two days ago I never knew that Pilar, Pablo nor the rest existed, he thought. There
was no such thing as Maria in the world. It was certainly a much simpler world. I had
instructions from Golz that were perfectly clear and seemed perfectly possible to carry
out although they presented certain difficulties and involved certain consequences. After
we blew the bridge I expected either to get back to the lines or not get back and if we
got back I was going to ask for some time in Madrid. No one has any leave in this war
but I am sure I could get two or three days in Madrid.
 In Madrid I wanted to buy some books, to go to the Florida Hotel and get a room and
“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway 125
to have a hot bath, he thought. I was going to send Luis the porter out for a bottle of
absinthe if he could locate one at the MantequerIas Leonesas or at any of the places off
the Gran Via and I was going to lie in bed and read after the bath and drink a couple of
absinthes and then I was going to call up Gaylord’s and see if I could come up there and
eat.
 He did not want to eat at the Gran Via because the food was no good really and you
had to get there on time or whatever there was of it would be gone. Also there were too
many newspaper men there he knew and he did not want to have to keep his mouth
shut. He wanted to drink the absinthes and to feel like talking and then go up to
Gaylord’s and eat with Karkov, where they had good food and real beer, and find out
what was going on in the war.
 He had not liked Gaylord’s, the hotel in Madrid the Russians had taken over when he
first went there because it seemed too luxurious and the food was too good for a
besieged city and the talk too cynical for a war. But I corrupted very easily, he thought.
Why should you not have as good food as could be organized when you came back
from something like this? And the talk that he had thought of as cynicism when he had
first heard it had turned out to be much too true. This will be something to tell at
Gaylord’s, he thought, when this is over. Yes, when this is over.
 Could you take Maria to Gaylord’s? No. You couldn’t. But you could leave her in the
hotel and she could take a hot bath and be there when you came back from Gaylord’s.
Yes, you could do that and after you had told Karkov about her, you could bring her later
because they would be curious about her and want to see her.
 Maybe you wouldn’t go to Gaylord’s at all. You could eat early at the Gran Via and
hurry back to the Florida. But you knew you would go to Gaylord’s because you wanted
to see all that again; you wanted to eat that food again and you wanted to see all the
comfort of it and the luxury of it after this. Then you would come back to the Florida and
there Maria would be. Sure, she would be there after this was over. After this was over.
Yes, after this was over. If he did this well he would rate a meal at Gaylord’s.
 Gaylord’s was the place where you met famous peasant and worker Spanish
commanders who had sprung to arms from the people at the start of the war without any
previous military training and found that many of them spoke Russian. That had been
the first big disillusion to him a few months back and he had started to be cynical to
himself about it. But when he realized how it happened it was all right. They were
peasants and workers. They had been active in the 1934 revolution and had to flee the
country when it failed and in Russia they had sent them to the military academy and to
the Lenin Institute the Comintern maintained so they would be ready to fight the next
time and have the necessary military education to command.
 The Comintern had educated them there. In a revolution you could not admit to
outsiders who helped you nor that any one knew more than he was supposed to know.
He had learned that. If a thing was right fundamentally the lying was not supposed to
matter. There was a lot of lying though. He did not care for the lying at first. He hated it.
Then later he had come to like it. It was part of being an insider but it was a very
corrupting business.
 It was at Gaylord’s that you learned that Valentin Gonzalez, called El Campesino or
The Peasant, had never been a peasant but was an ex-sergeant in the Spanish Foreign
Legion who had deserted and fought with Abd el Krim. That was all right, too. Why
shouldn’t he be? You had to have these peasant leaders quickly in this sort of war and a
real peasant leader might be a little too much like Pablo. You couldn’t wait for the real
Peasant Leader to arrive and he might have too many peasant characteristics when he
did. So you had to manufacture one. At that, from what he had seen of Campesino, with
his black beard, his thick negroid lips, and his feverish, staring eyes, he thought he
might give almost as much trouble as a real peasant leader. The last time he had seen
him he seemed to have gotten to believe his own publicity and think he was a peasant.
He was a brave, tough man; no braver in the world. But God, how he talked too much.
And when he was excited he would say anything no matter what the consequences of
“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway 126
his indiscretion. And those consequences had been many already. He was a wonderful
Brigade Commander though in a situation where it looked as though everything was
lost. He never knew when everything was lost and if it was, he would fight out of it.
 At Gaylord’s, too, you met the simple stonemason, Enrique Lister from Galicia, who
now commanded a division and who talked Russian, too. And you met the cabinet
worker, Juan Modesto from AndalucIa who had just been given an Army Corps. He
never learned his Russian in Puerto de Santa Maria although he might have if they had
a Berlitz School there that the cabinet makers went to. He was the most trusted of the
young soldiers by the Russians because he was a true party man, “a hundred per cent”
they said, proud to use the Americanism. He was much more intelligent than Lister or El
Campesino.
 Sure, Gaylord’s was the place you needed to complete your education. It was there
you learned how it was all really done instead of how it was supposed to be done. He
had only started his education, he thought. He wondered whether he would continue
with it long. Gaylord’s was good and sound and what he needed. At the start when he
had still believed all the nonsense it had come as a shock to him. But now he knew
enough to accept the necessity for all the deception and what he learned at Gaylord’s
only strengthened him in his belief in the things that he did hold to be true. He liked to
know how it really was; not how it was supposed to be. There was always lying in a war.
But the truth of Lister, Modesto, and El Campesino was much better than the lies and
legends. Well, some day they would tell the truth to every one and meantime he was
glad there was a Gaylord’s for his own learning of it.
 Yes, that was where he would go in Madrid after he had bought the books and after he
had lain in the hot bath and had a couple of drinks and had read awhile. But that was
before Maria had come into all this that he had that plan. All right. They would have two
rooms and she could do what she liked while he went up there and he’d come back from
Gaylord’s to her. She had waited up in the hills all this time. She could wait a little while
at the Hotel Florida. They would have three days in Madrid. Three days could be a long
time. He’d take her to see the Marx Brothers at the Opera. That had been running for
three months now and would certainly be good for three months more. She’d like the
Marx Brothers at the Opera, he thought. She’d like that very much.
 It was a long way from Gaylord’s to this cave though. No, that was not the long way.
The long way was going to be from this cave to Gaylord’s. Kashkin had taken him there
first and he had not liked it. Kashkin had said he should meet Karkov because Karkov
wanted to know Americans and because he was the greatest lover of Lope de Vega in
the world and thought “Fuente Ovejuna” was the greatest play ever written. Maybe it
was at that, but he, Robert Jordan, did not think so.
 He had liked Karkov but not the place. Karkov was the most intelligent man he had
ever met. Wearing black riding boots, gray breeches, and a gray tunic, with tiny hands
and feet, puffily fragile of face and body, with a spitting way of talking through his bad
teeth, he looked comic when Robert Jordan first saw him. But he had more brains and
more inner dignity and outer insolence and humor than any man that he had ever
known.
 Gaylord’s itself had seemed indecently luxurious and corrupt. But why shouldn’t the
representatives of a power that governed a sixth of the world have a few comforts? Well,
they had them and Robert Jordan had at first been repelled by the whole business and
then had accepted it and enjoyed it. Kashkin had made him out to be a hell of a fellow
and Karkov had at first been insultingly polite and then, when Robert Jordan had not
played at being a hero but had told a story that was really funny and obscenely
discreditable to himself, Karkov had shifted from the politeness to a relieved rudeness
and then to insolence and they had become friends.
 Kashkin had only been tolerated there. There was something wrong with Kashkin
evidently and he was working it out in Spain. They would not tell him what it was but
maybe they would now that he was dead. Anyway, he and Karkov had become friends
and he had become friends too with the incredibly thin, drawn, dark, loving, nervous,
“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway 127
deprived and unbitter woman with a lean, neglected body and dark, gray-streaked hair
cut short who was Karkov’s wife and who served as an interpreter with the tank corps.
He was a friend too of Karkov’s mistress, who had cat-eyes, reddish gold hair
(sometimes more red; sometimes more gold, depending on the coiffeurs), a lazy
sensual body (made to fit well against other bodies), a mouth made to fit other mouths,
and a stupid, ambitious and utterly loyal mind. This mistress loved gossip and enjoyed a
periodically controlled promiscuity which seemed only to amuse Karkov. Karkov was
supposed to have another wife somewhere besides the tank-corps one, maybe two
more, but nobody was very sure about that. Robert Jordan liked both the wife he knew
and the mistress. He thought he would probably like the other wife, too, if he knew her, if
there was one. Karkov had good taste in women.
 There were sentries with bayonets downstairs outside the portecochere at Gaylord’s
and tonight it would be the pleasantest and most comfortable place in all of besieged
Madrid. He would like to be there tonight instead of here. Though it was all right here,
now they had stopped that wheel. And the snow was stopping too.
 He would like to show his Maria to Karkov but he could not take her there unless he
asked first and he would have to see how he was received after this trip. Golz would be
there after this attack was over and if he had done well they would all know it from Golz.
Golz would make fun of him, too, about Maria. After what he’d said to him about no girls.
 He reached over to the bowl in front of Pablo and dipped up a cup of wine. “With your
permission,” he said.
 Pablo nodded. He is engaged in his military studies, I imagine, Robert Jordan thought.
Not seeking the bubble reputation in the cannon’s mouth but seeking the solution to the
problem in yonder bowl. But you know the bastard must be fairly able to have run this
band successfully for as long as he did. Looking at Pablo he wondered what sort of
guerilla leader he would have been in the American Civil War. There were lots of them,
he thought. But we know very little about them. Not the Quantrills, nor the Mosbys, nor
his own grandfathei but the little ones, the bushwhackers. And about the drinking. Do
you suppose Grant really was a drunk? His grandfather always claimed he was. That he
was always a little drunk by four o’clock in the afternoon and that before Vicksburg
sometimes during the siege he was very drunk for a couple of days. But grandfather
claimed that he functioned perfectly normally no matter how much he drank except that
sometimes it was very hard to wake him. But if you could wake him he was normal.
 There wasn’t any Grant, nor any Sherman nor any Stonewall Jackson on either side
so far in this war. No. Nor any Jeb Stuart either. Nor any Sheridan. It was overrun with
McClellans though. The fascists had plenty of McClellans and we had at least three of
them.
 He had certainly not seen any military geniuses in this war. Not a one. Nor anything
resembling one. Kleber, Lucasz, and Hans had done a fine job of their share in the
defense of Madrid with the International Brigades and then the old bald, spectacled,
conceited, stupid-as-an-owl, unintelligent-in-conversation, brave— and-as-dumb-as-abull, propaganda-build-up defender of Madrid, Miaja, had been so jealous of the
publicity Kleber received that he had forced the Russians to relieve Kieber of his
command and send him to Valencia. Kieber was a good soldier; but limited and he did
talk too much for the job he had. Golz was a good general and a fine soldier but they
always kept him in a subordinate position and never gave him a free hand. This attack
was going to be his biggest show so far and Robert Jordan did not like too much what
he had heard about the attack. Then there was Gall, the Hungarian, who ought to be
shot if you could believe half you heard at Gaylord’s. Make it if you can believe ten per
cent of what you hear at Gaylord’s, Robert Jordan thought.
 He wished that he had seen the fighting on the plateau beyond Guadalajara when
they beat the Italians. But he had been down in Estremadura then. Hans had told him
about it one night in Gaylord’s two weeks ago and made him see it all. There was one
moment when it was really lost when the Italians had broken the line near Trijueque and
the Twelfth Brigade would have been cut off if the Torija-Brihuega road had been cut.
“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway 128
“But knowing they were Italians,” Hans had said, “we attempted to manoeuvre which
would have been unjustifiable against other troops. And it was successful.”
 Hans had shown it all to him on his maps of the battle. Hans carried them around with
him in his map case all the time and still seemed marvelled and happy at the miracle of
it. Hans was a fine soldier and a good companion. Lister’s and Modesto’s and
Campesino’s Spanish troops had all fought well in that battle, Hans had told him, and
that was to be credited to their leaders and to the discipline they enforced. But Lister
and Campesino and Modesto had been told many of the moves they should make by
their Russian military advisers. They were like students flying a machine with dual
controls which the pilot could take over whenever they made a mistake. Well, this year
would show how much and how well they learned. After a while there would not be dual
controls and then we would see how well they handled divisions and army corps alone.
 They were Communists and they were disciplinarians. The discipline that they would
enforce would make good troops. Lister was murderous in discipline. He was a true
fanatic and he had the complete Spanish lack of respect for life. In a few armies since
the Tartar’s first invasion of the West were men executed summarily for as little reason
as they were under his command. But he knew how to forge a division into a fighting
unit. It is one thing to hold positions. It is another to attack positions and take them and it
is something very different to manoeuvre an army in the field, Robert Jordan thought as
he sat there at the table. From what I have seen of him, I wonder how Lister will be at
that once the dual controls are gone? But maybe they won’t go, he thought. I wonder if
they will go? Or whether they will strengthen? I wonder what the Russian stand is on the
whole business? Gaylord’s is the place, he thought. There is much that I need to know
now that I can learn only at Gaylord’s.
 At one time he had thought Gaylord’s had been bad for him. It was the opposite of the
puritanical, religious communism of Velazquez 63, the Madrid palace that had been
turned into the International Brigade headquarters in the capital. At Velazquez 63 it was
like being a member of a religious order—and Gaylord’s was a long way away from the
feeling you had at the headquarters of the Fifth Regiment before it had been broken up
into the brigades of the new army.
 At either of those places you felt that you were taking part in a crusade. That was the
only word for it although it was a word that had been so worn and abused that it no
longer gave its true meaning. You felt, in spite of all bureaucracy and inefficiency and
party strife, something that was like the feeling you expected to have and did not have
when you made your first communion. It was a feeling of consecration to a duty toward
all of the oppressed of the world which would be as difficult and embarrassing to speak
about as religious experience and yet it was authentic as the feeling you had when you
heard Bach, or stood in Chartres Cathedral or the Cathedral at Leon and saw the light
coming through the great windows; or when you saw Mantegna and Greco and
Brueghel in the Prado. It gave you a part in something that you could believe in wholly
and completely and in which you felt an absolute brotherhood with the others who were
engaged in it. It was something that you had never known before but that you had
experienced now and you gave such importance to it and the reasons for it that your
own death seemed of complete unimportance; only a thing to be avoided because it
would interfere with the performance of your duty. But the best thing was that there was
something you could do about this feeling and this necessity too. You could fight.
 So you fought, he thought. And in the fighting soon there was no purity of feeling for
those who survived the fighting and were good at it. Not after the first six months.
 The defense of a position or of a city is a part of war in which you can feel that first
sort of feeling. The fighting in the Sierras had been that way. They had fought there with
the true comradeship of the revolution. Up there when there had been the first necessity
for the enforcement of discipline he had approved and understood it. Under the shelling
men had been cowards and had run. He had seen them shot and left to swell beside the
road, nobody bothering to do more than strip them of their cartridges and their
valuables. Taking their cartridges, their boots and their leather coats was right. Taking
“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway 129
the valuables was only realistic. It only kept the anarchists from getting them.
 It had seemed just and right and necessary that the men who ran were shot. There
was nothing wrong about it. Their running was a selfishness. The fascists had attacked
and we had stopped them on that slope in the gray rocks, the scrub pines and the gorse
of the Guadarrama hillsides. We had held along the road under the bombing from the
planes and the shelling when they brought their artillery up and those who were left at
the end of that day had counterattacked and driven them back. Later, when they had
tried to come down on the left, sifting down between the rocks and through the trees, we
had held out in the Sanitarium firing from the windows and the roof although they had
passed it on both sides, and we lived through knowing what it was to be surrounded
until the counterattack had cleared them back behind the road again.
 In all that, in the fear that dries your mouth and your throat, in the smashed plaster
dust and the sudden panic of a wall falling, collapsing in the flash and roar of a
shellburst, clearing the gun, dragging those away who had been serving it, lying face
downward and covered with rubble, your head behind the shield working on a stoppage,
getting the broken case out, straightening the belt again, you now lying straight behind
the shield, the gun searching the roadside again; you did the thing there was to do and
knew that you were right. You learned the dry-mouthed, fear-purged, purging ecstasy of
battle and you fought that summer and that fall for all the poor in the world, against all
tyranny, for all the things that you believed and for the new world you had been
educated into. You learned that fall, he thought, how to endure and how to ignore
suffering in the long time of cold and wetness, of mud and of digging and fortifying. And
the feeling of the summer and the fall was buried deep under tiredness, sleepiness, and
nervousness and discomfort. But it was still there and all that you went through only
served to validate it. It was in those days, he thought, that you had a deep and sound
and selfless pride—that would have made you a bloody bore at Gaylord’s, he thought
suddenly.
 No, you would not have been so good at Gaylord’s then, he thought. You were too
naïve. You were in a sort of state of grace. But Gaylord’s might not have been the way it
was now at that time, either. No, as a matter of fact, it was not that way, he told himself.
It was not that way at all. There was not any Gaylord’s then.
 Karkov had told him about those days. At that time what Russians there were had
lived at the Palace Hotel. Robert Jordan had known none of them then. That was before
the first partizan groups had been formed; before he had met Kashkin or any of the
others. Kashkin had been in the north at Irun, at San Sebastian and in the abortive
fighting toward Vitoria. He had not arrived in Madrid until January and while Robert
Jordan had fought at Carabanchel and at Usera in those three days when they stopped
the right wing of the fascist attack on Madrid and drove the Moors and the Tercio back
from house to house to clear that battered suburb on the edge of the gray, sun-baked
plateau and establish a line of defense along the heights that would protect that corner
of the city, Karkov had been in Madrid.
 Karkov was not cynical about those times either when he talked. Those were the days
they all shared when everything looked lost and each man retained now, better than any
citation or decoration, the knowledge of just how he would act when everything looked
lost. The government had abandoned the city, taking all the motor cars from the ministry
of war in their flight and old Miaja had to ride down to inspect his defensive positions on
a bicycle. Robert Jordan did not believe that one. He could not see Miaja on a bicycle
even in his most patriotic imagination, but Karkov said it was true. But then he had
written it for Russian papers so he probably wanted to believe it was true after writing it.
 But there was another story that Karkov had not written. He had three wounded
Russians in the Palace Hotel for whom he was responsible. They were two tank drivers
and a flyer who were too bad to be moved, and since, at that time, it was of the greatest
importance that there should be no evidence of any Russian intervention to justify an
open intervention by the fascists, it was Karkov’s responsibility that these wounded
should not fall into the hands of the fascists in case the city should be abandoned.
“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway 130
 In the event the city should be abandoned, Karkov was to poison them to destroy all
evidence of their identity before leaving the Palace Hotel. No one could prove from the
bodies of three wounded men, one with three bullet wounds in his abdomen, one with
his jaw shot away and his vocal cords exposed, one with his femur smashed to bits by a
bullet and his hands and face so badly burned that his face was just an eyelashless,
eyebrowless, hairless blister that they were Russians. No one could tell from the bodies
of these wounded men he would leave in beds at the Palace, that they were Russians.
Nothing proved a naked dead man was a Russian. Your nationality and your politics did
not show when you were dead.
 Robert Jordan had asked Karkov how he felt about the necessity of performing this act
and Karkov had said that he had not looked forward to it. “How were you going to do it?”
Robert Jordan had asked him and had added, “You know it isn’t so simple just suddenly
to poison people.” And Karkov had said, “Oh, yes, it is when you carry it always for your
own use.” Then he had opened his cigarette case and showed Robert Jordan what he
carried in one side of it.
 “But the first thing anybody would do if they took you prisoner would be to take your
cigarette case,” Robert Jordan had objected. “They would have your hands up.”
 “But I have a little more here,” Karkov had grinned and showed the lapel of his jacket.
“You simply put the lapel in your mouth like this and bite it and swallow.”
 “That’s much better,” Robert Jordan had said. “Tell me, does it smell like bitter
almonds the way it always does in detective stories?”
 “I don’t know,” Karkov said delightedly. “I have never smelled it. Should we break a
little tube and smell it?”
 “Better keep it.”
 “Yes,” Karkov said and put the cigarette case away. “I am not a defeatist, you
understand, but it is always possible that such serious times might come again and you
cannot get this anywhere. Have you seen the communiqué from the Córdoba front? It is
very beautiful. It is now my favorite among all the communiqués.”
 “What did it say?” Robert Jordan had come to Madrid from the Córdoban Front and he
had the sudden stiffening that comes when some one jokes about a thing which you
yourself may joke about but which they may not. “Tell me?”
 “Nuestra gloriosa tropa siga avanzando sin perder ni una sola palma de terreno,”
Karkov said in his strange Spanish.
 “It didn’t really say that,” Robert Jordan doubted.
 “Our glorious troops continue to advance without losing a foot of ground,” Karkov
repeated in English. “It is in the communiqué. I will find it for you.”
 You could remember the men you knew who died in the fighting around Pozoblanco;
but it was a joke at Gaylord’s.
 So that was the way it was at Gaylord’s now. Still there had not always been Gaylord’s
and if the situation was now one which produced such a thing as Gaylord’s out of the
survivors of the early days, he was glad to see Gaylord’s and to know about it. You are
a long way from how you felt in the Sierra and at Carabanchel and at Usera, he thought.
You corrupt very easily, he thought. But was it corruption or was it merely that you lost
the naïveté that you started with? Would it not be the same in anything? Who else kept
that first chastity of mind about their work that young doctors, young priests, and young
soldiers usually started with? The priests certainly kept it, or they got out. I suppose the
Nazis keep it, he thought, and the Communists who have a severe enough
selfdiscipline. But look at Karkov.
 He never tired of considering the case of Karkov. The last time he had been at
Gaylord’s Karkov had been wonderful about a certain British economist who had spent
much time in Spain. Robert Jordan had read this man’s writing for years and he had
always respected him without knowing anything about him. He had not cared very much
for what this man had written about Spain. It was too clear and simple and too open and
shut and many of the statistics he knew were faked by wishful thinking. But he thought
you rarely cared for journalism written about a country you really knew about and he
“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway 131
respected the man for his intentions.
 Then he had seen the man, finally, on the afternoon when they had attacked at
Carabanchel.They were sitting in the lee of the bull ring and there was shooting down
the two streets and every one was nervous waiting for the attack. A tank had been
promised and it had not come up and Montero was sitting with his head in his hand
saying, “The tank has not come. The tank has not come.”
 It was a cold day and the yellow dust was blowing down the street and Montero had
been hit in the left arm and the arm was stiffening. “We have to have a tank,” he said.
“We must wait for the tank, but we cannot wait.” His wound was making him sound
petulant.
 Robert Jordan had gone back to look for the tank which Montero said he thought
might have stopped behind the apartment building on the corner of the tram-line. It was
there all right. But it was not a tank. Spaniards called anything a tank in those days. It
was an old armored car. The driver did not want to leave the angle of the apartment
house and bring it up to the bull ring. He was standing behind it with his arms folded
against the metal of the car and his head in the leather-padded helmet on his arms. He
shook his head when Robert Jordan spoke to him and kept it pressed against his arms.
Then he turned his head without looking at Robert Jordan.
 “I have no orders to go there,” he said sullenly.
 Robert Jordan had taken his pistol out of the holster and pushed the muzzle of the
pistol against the leather coat of the armored car driver.
 “Here are your orders,” he had told him. The man shook his head with the big paddedleather helmet like a football player’s on it and said, “There is no ammunition for the
machine gun.”
 “We have ammunition at the bull ring,” Robert Jordan had told him. “Come on, let’s go.
We will fill the belts there. Come on.”
 “There is no one to work the gun,” the driver said.
 “Where is he? Where is your mate?”
 “Dead,” the driver had said. “Inside there.”
 “Get him out,” Robert Jordan had said. “Get him out of there.”
 “I do not like to touch him,” the driver had said. “And he is bent over between the gun
and the wheel and I cannot get past him.”
 “Come on,” Robert Jordan had said. “We will get him out together.”
 He had banged his head as he climbed into the armored car and it had made a small
cut over his eyebrow that bled down onto his face. The dead man was heavy and so stiff
you could not bend him and he had to hammer at his head to get it out from where it had
wedged, face down, between his seat and the wheel. Finally he got it up by pushing with
his knee up under the dead man’s head and then, pulling back on the man’s waist now
that the head was loose, he pulled the dead man out himself toward the door.
 “Give me a hand with him,” he had said to the driver.
 “I do not want to touch him,” the driver had said and Robert Jordan had seen that he
was crying. The tears ran straight down on each side of his nose on the powder-grimed
slope of his face and his nose was running, too.
 Standing beside the door he had swung the dead man out and the dead man fell onto
the sidewalk beside the tram-line still in that hunched-over, doubled-up position. He lay
there, his face waxy gray against the cement sidewalk, his hands bent under him as
they had been in the car.
 “Get in, God damn it,” Robert Jordan had said, motioning now with his pistol to the
driver. “Get in there now.”
 Just then he had seen this man who had come out from the lee of the apartment
house building. He had on a long overcoat and he was bareheaded and his hair was
gray, his cheekbones broad and his eyes were deep and set close together. He had a
package of Chesterfields in his hand and he took one out and handed it toward Robert
Jordan who was pushing the driver into the armored car with his pistol.
 “Just a minute, Comrade,” he had said to Robert Jordan in Spanish. “Can you explain
“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway 132
to me something about the fighting?”
 Robert Jordan took the cigarette and put it in the breast pocket of his blue mechanic
jumper. He had recognized this comrade from his pictures. It was the British economist.
 “Go muck yourself,” he said in English and then, in Spanish, to the armored car driver.
“Down there. The bull ring. See?” And he had pulled the heavy side door to with a slam
and locked it and they had started down that long slope in the car and the bullets had
commenced to hit against the car, sounding like pebbles tossed against an iron boiler.
Then when the machine gun opened on them, they were like sharp hammer tappings.
They had pulled up behind the shelter of the bull ring with the last October posters still
pasted up beside the ticket window and the ammunition boxes knocked open and the
comrades with the rifles, the grenades on their belts and in their pockets, waiting there
in the lee and Montero had said, “Good. Here is the tank. Now we can attack.”
 Later that night when they had the last houses on the hill, he lay comfortable behind a
brick wall with a hole knocked in the bricks for a loophole and looked across the
beautiful level field of fire they had between them and the ridge the fascists had retired
to and thought, with a comfort that was almost voluptuous, of the rise of the hill with the
smashed villa that protected the left flank. He had lain in a pile of straw in his sweatsoaked clothes and wound a blanket around him while he dried. Lying there he thought
of the economist and laughed, and then felt sorry he had been rude. But at the moment,
when the man had handed him the cigarette, pushing it out almost like offering a tip for
information, the combatant’s hatred for the noncombatant had been too much for him.
 Now he remembered Gaylord’s and Karkov speaking of this same man. “So it was
there you met him,” Karkov had said. “I did not get farther than the Puente de Toledo
myself on that day. He was very far toward the front. That was the last day of his
bravery I believe. He left Madrid the next day. Toledo was where he was the bravest, I
believe. At Toledo he was enormous. He was one of the architects of our capture of the
Alcazar. You should have seen him at Toledo. I believe it was largely through his efforts
and his advice that our siege was successful. That was the silliest part of the war. It
reached an ultimate in silliness but tell me, what is thought of him in America?”
 “In America,” Robert Jordan said, “he is supposed to be very close to Moscow.”
 “He is not,” said Karkov. “But he has a wonderful face and his face and his manners
are very successful. Now with my face I could do nothing. What little I have
accomplished was all done in spite of my face which does not either inspire people nor
move them to love me and to trust me. But this man Mitchell has a face he makes his
fortune with. It is the face of a conspirator. All who have read of conspirators in books
trust him instantly. Also he has the true manner of the conspirator. Any one seeing him
enter a room knows that he is instantly in the presence of a conspirator of the first mark.
All of your rich compatriots who wish sentimentally to aid the Soviet Union as they
believe or to insure themselves a little against any eventual success of the party see
instantly in the face of this man, and in his manner that he can be none other than a
trusted agent of the Comintern.”
 “Has he no connections in Moscow?”
 “None. Listen, Comrade Jordan. Do you know about the two kinds of fools?”
 “Plain and damn?”
 “No. The two kinds of fools we have in Russia,” Karkov grinned and began. “First there
is the winter fool. The winter fool comes to the door of your house and he knocks loudly.
You go to the door and you see him there and you have never seen him before. He is
an impressive sight. He is a very big man and he has on high boots and a fur coat and a
fur hat and he is all covered with snow. First he stamps his boots and snow falls from
them. Then he takes off his fur coat and shakes it and more snow falls. Then he takes
off his fur hat and knocks it against the door. More snow falls from his fur hat. Then he
stamps his boots again and advances into the room. Then you look at him and you see
he is a fool. That is the winter fool.
 “Now in the summer you see a fool going down the street and he is waving his arms
and jerking his head from side to side and everybody from two hundred yards away can
“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway 133
tell he is a fool. That is a summer fool. This economist is a winter fool.”
 “But why do people trust him here?” Robert Jordan asked.
 “His face,” Karkov said. “His beautiful gueule de conspirateur. And his invaluable trick
of just having come from somewhere else where he is very trusted and important. Of
course,” he smiled, “he must travel very much to keep the trick working. You know the
Spanish are very strange,” Karkov went on. “This government has had much money.
Much gold. They will give nothing to their friends. You are a friend. All right. You will do it
for nothing and should not be rewarded. But to people representing an important firm or
a country which is not friendly but must be influenced—to such people they give much. It
is very interesting when you follow it closely.”
 “I do not like it. Also that money belongs to the Spanish workers.”
 “You are not supposed to like things. Only to understand,” Karkov had told him. “I
teach you a little each time I see you and eventually you will acquire an education. It
would be very interesting for a professor to be educated.”
 “I don’t know whether I’ll be able to be a professor when I get back. They will probably
run me out as a Red.”
 “Well, perhaps you will be able to come to the Soviet Union and continue your studies
there. That might be the best thing for you to do.”
 “But Spanish is my field.”
 “There are many countries where Spanish is spoken,” Karkov had said. “They cannot
all be as difficult to do anything with as Spain is. Then you must remember that you
have not been a professor now for almost nine months. In nine months you may have
learned a new trade. How much dialectics have you read?”
 “I have read the Handbook of Marxism that Emil Burns edited. That is all.”
 “If you have read it all that is quite a little. There are fifteen hundred pages and you
could spend some time on each page. But there are some other things you should
read.”
 “There is no time to read now.”
 “I know,” Karkov had said. “I mean eventually. There are many things to read which
will make you understand some of these things that happen. But out of this will come a
book which is very necessary; which will explain many things which it is necessary to
know. Perhaps I will write it. I hope that it will be me who will write it.”
 “I don’t know who could write it better.”
 “Do not flatter,” Karkov had said. “I am a journalist. But like all journalists I wish to
write literature. Just now, I am very busy on a study of Calvo Sotelo. He was a very
good fascist; a true Spanish fascist. Franco and these other people are not. I have been
studying all of Sotelo’s writing and speeches. He was very intelligent and it was very
intelligent that he was killed.”
 “I thought that you did not believe in political assassination.”
 “It is practised very extensively,” Karkov said. “Very, very extensively.”
 “But—”
 “We do not believe in acts of terrorism by individuals,” Karkov had smiled. “Not of
course by criminal terrorist and counterrevolutionary organizations. We detest with
horror the duplicity and villainy of the murderous hyenas of Bukharinite wreckers and
such dregs of humanity as Zinoviev, Kamenev, Rykov and their henchmen. We hate
and loathe these veritable fiends,” he smiled again. “But I still believe that political
assassination can be said to be practised very extensively.”
 “You mean—”
 “I mean nothing. But certainly we execute and destroy such veritable fiends and dregs
of humanity and the treacherous dogs of generals and the revolting spectacle of
admirals unfaithful to their trust. These are destroyed. They are not assassinated. You
see the difference?”
 “I see,” Robert Jordan had said.
 “And because I make jokes sometime: and you know how dangerous it is to make
jokes even in joke? Good. Because I make jokes, do not think that the Spanish people
“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway 134
will not live to regret that they have not shot certain generals that even now hold
commands. I do not like the shootings, you understand.”
 “I don’t mind them,” Robert Jordan said. “I do not like them but I do not mind them any
more.”
 “I know that,” Karkov had said. “I have been told that.”
 “Is it important?” Robert Jordan said. “I was only trying to be truthful about it.”
 “It is regretful,” Karkov had said. “But it is one of the things that makes people be
treated as reliable who would ordinarily have to spend much more time before attaining
that category.”
 “Am I supposed to be reliable?”
 “In your work you are supposed to be very reliable. I must talk to you sometime to see
how you are in your mind. It is regrettable that we never speak seriously.”
 “My mind is in suspension until we win the war,” Robert Jordan had said.
 “Then perhaps you will not need it for a long time. But you should be careful to
exercise it a little.”
 “I read Mundo Obrero,” Robert Jordan had told him and Karkov had said, “All right.
Good. I can take a joke too. But there are very intelligent things in Mundo Obrero. The
only intelligent things written on this war.”
 “Yes,” Robert Jordan had said. “I agree with you. But to get a full picture of what is
happening you cannot read only the party organ.”
 “No,” Karkov had said. “But you will not find any such picture if you read twenty papers
and then, if you had it, I do not know what you would do with it. I have such a picture
almost constantly and what I do is try to forget it.”
 “You think it is that bad?”
 “It is better now than it was. We are getting rid of some of the worst. But it is very
rotten. We are building a huge army now and some of the elements, those of Modesto,
of El Campesino, of Lister and of Durán, are reliable. They are more than reliable. They
are magnificent. You will see that. Also we still have the Brigades although their role is
changing. But an army that is made up of good and bad elements cannot win a war. All
must be brought to a certain level of political development; all must know why they are
fighting, and its importance. All must believe in the fight they are to make and all must
accept discipline. We are making a huge conscript army without the time to implant the
discipline that a conscript army must have, to behave properly under fire. We call it a
people’s army but it will not have the assets of a true people’s army and it will not have
the iron discipline that a conscript army needs. You will see. It is a very dangerous
procedure.”
 “You are not very cheerful today.”
 “No,” Karkov had said. “I have just come back from Valencia where I have seen many
people. No one comes back very cheerful from Valencia. In Madrid you feel good and
clean and with no possibility of anything but winning. Valencia is something else. The
cowards who fled from Madrid still govern there. They have settled happily into the sloth
and bureaucracy of governing. They have only contempt for those of Madrid. Their
obsession now is the weakening of the commissariat for war. And Barcelona. You
should see Barcelona.”
 “How is it?”
 “It is all still comic opera. First it was the paradise of the crackpots and the romantic
revolutionists. Now it is the paradise of the fake soldier. The soldiers who like to wear
uniforms, who like to strut and swagger and wear red-and-black scarves. Who like
everything about war except to fight. Valencia makes you sick and Barcelona makes
you laugh.”
 “What about the P.O.U.M. putsch?”
 “The P.O.U.M. was never serious. It was a heresy of crackpots and wild men and it
was really just an infantilism. There were some honest misguided people. There was
one fairly good brain and there was a little fascist money. Not much. The poor P.O.U.M.
They were very silly people.”
“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway 135
 “But were many killed in the putsch?”
 “Not so many as were shot afterwards or will be shot. The P.O.U.M. It is like the name.
Not serious. They should have called it the M.U.M.P.S. or the M.E.A.S.L.E.S. But no.
The Measles is much more dangerous. It can affect both sight and hearing. But they
made one plot you know to kill me, to kill Walter, to kill Modesto and to kill Prieto. You
see how badly mixed up they were? We are not at all alike. Poor P.O.U.M. They never
did kill anybody. Not at the front nor anywhere else. A few in Barcelona, yes.”
 “Were you there?”
 “Yes. I have sent a cable describing the wickedness of that infamous organization of
Trotskyite murderers and their fascist machinations all beneath contempt but, between
us, it is not very serious, the P.O.U.M. Nin was their only man. We had him but he
escaped from our hands.”
 “Where is he now?”
 “In Paris. We say he is in Paris. He was a very pleasant fellow but with bad political
aberrations.”
 “But they were in communication with the fascists, weren’t they?”
 “Who is not?”
 “We are not.”
 “Who knows? I hope we are not. You go often behind their lines,” he grinned. “But the
brother of one of the secretaries of the Republican Embassy at Paris made a trip to St.
Jean de Luz last week to meet people from Burgos.”
 “I like it better at the front,” Robert Jordan had said. “The closer to the front the better
the people.”
 “How do you like it behind the fascist lines?”
 “Very much. We have fine people there.”
 “Well, you see they must have their fine people behind our lines the same way. We
find them and shoot them and they find ours and shoot them. When you are in their
country you must always think of how many people they must send over to us.”
 “I have thought about them.”
 “Well,” Karkov had said. “You have probably enough to think about for today, so drink
that beer that is left in the pitcher and run along now because I have to go upstairs to
see people. Upstairs people. Come again to see me soon.”
 Yes, Robert Jordan thought. You learned a lot at Gaylord’s. Karkov had read the one
and only book he had published. The book had not been a success. It was only two
hundred pages long and he doubted if two thousand people had ever read it. He had put
in it what he had discovered about Spain in ten years of travelling in it, on foot, in thirdclass carriages, by bus, on horse- and mule-back and in trucks. He knew the Basque
country, Navarre, Aragon, Galicia, the two Castiles and Estremadura well. There had
been such good books written by Borrow and Ford and the rest that he had been able to
add very little. But Karkov said it was a good book.
 “It is why I bother with you,” he said. “I think you write absolutely truly and that is very
rare. So I would like you to know some things.”
 All right. He would write a book when he got through with this. But only about the
things he knew, truly, and about what he knew. But I will have to be a much better writer
than I am now to handle them, he thought. The things he had come to know in this war
were not so simple.
19
 “What do you do sitting there?” Maria asked him. She was standing close beside him
and he turned his head and smiled at her.
 “Nothing,” he said. “I have been thinking.”
 “What of? The bridge?”
 “No. The bridge is terminated. Of thee and of a hotel in Madrid where I know some
Russians, and of a book I will write some time.”
“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway 136
 “Are there many Russians in Madrid?”
 “No. Very few.”
 “But in the fascist periodicals it says there are hundreds of thousands.”
 “Those are lies. There are very few.”
 “Do you like the Russians? The one who was here was a Russian.”
 “Did you like him?”
 “Yes. I was sick then but I thought he was very beautiful and very brave.”
 “What nonsense, beautiful,” Pilar said. “His nose was flat as my hand and he had
cheekbones as wide as a sheep’s buttocks.”
 “He was a good friend and comrade of mine,” Robert Jordan said to Maria. “I cared for
him very much.”
 “Sure,” Pilar said. “But you shot him.”
 When she said this the card players looked up from the table and Pablo stared at
Robert Jordan. Nobody said anything and then the gypsy, Rafael, asked, “Is it true,
Roberto?”
 “Yes,” Robert Jordan said. He wished Pilar had not brought this up and he wished he
had not told it at El Sordo’s. “At his request. He was badly wounded.”
 “Qué cosa mas rara,” the gypsy said. “All the time he was with us he talked of such a
possibility. I don’t know how many times I have promised him to perform such an act.
What a rare thing,” he said again and shook his head.
 “He was a very rare man,” Primitivo said. “Very singular.”
 “Look,” Andrés, one of the brothers, said. “You who are Professor and all. Do you
believe in the possibility of a man seeing ahead what is to happen to him?”
 “I believe he cannot see it,” Robert Jordan said. Pablo was staring at him curiously
and Pilar was watching him with no expression on her face. “In the case of this Russian
comrade he was very nervous from being too much time at the front. He had fought at
Irun which, you know, was bad. Very bad. He had fought later in the north. And since
the first groups who did this work behind the lines were formed he had worked here, in
Estremadura and in AndalucIa. I think he was very tired and nervous and he imagined
ugly things.”
 “He would undoubtedly have seen many evil things,” Fernando said.
 “Like all the world,” Andrés said. “But listen to me, Inglés. Do you think there is such a
thing as a man knowing in advance what will befall him?”
 “No,” Robert Jordan said. “That is ignorance and superstition.”
 “Go on,” Pilar said. “Let us hear the viewpoint of the professor.” She spoke as though
she were talking to a precocious child.
 “I believe that fear produces evil visions,” Robert Jordan said. “Seeing bad signs—”
 “Such as the airplanes today,” Primitivo said.
 “Such as thy arrival,” Pablo said softly and Robert Jordan looked across the table at
him, saw it was not a provocation but only an expressed thought, then went on. “Seeing
bad signs, one, with fear, imagines an end for himself and one thinks that imagining
comes by divination,” Robert Jordan concluded. “I believe there is nothing more to it
than that. I do not believe in ogres, nor soothsayers, nor in the supernatural things.”
 “But this one with the rare name saw his fate clearly,” the gypsy said. “And that was
how it happened.”
 “He did not see it,” Robert Jordan said. “He had a fear of such a possibility and it
became an obsession. No one can tell me that he saw anything.”
 “Not I?” Pilar asked him and picked some dust up from the fire and blew it off the palm
of her hand. “I cannot tell thee either?”
 “No. With all wizardry, gypsy and all, thou canst not tell me either.”
 “Because thou art a miracle of deafness,” Pilar said, her big face harsh and broad in
the candlelight. “It is not that thou art stupid. Thou art simply deaf. One who is deaf
cannot hear music. Neither can he hear the radio. So he might say, never having heard
them, that such things do not exist. Qué va, Inglés. I saw the death of that one with the
rare name in his face as though it were burned there with a branding iron.”
“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway 137
 “You did not,” Robert Jordan insisted. “You saw fear and apprehension. The fear was
made by what he had been through. The apprehension was for the possibility of evil he
imagined.”
 “Qué va,” Pilar said. “I saw death there as plainly as though it were sitting on his
shoulder. And what is more he smelt of death.”
 “He smelt of death,” Robert Jordan jeered. “Of fear maybe. There is a smell to fear.”
 “De la muerte,” Pilar said. “Listen. When Blanquet, who was the greatest peon de
brega who ever lived, worked under the orders of Granero he told me that on the day of
Manolo Granero’s death, when they stopped in the chapel on the way to the ring, the
odor of death was so strong on Manolo that it almost made Blanquet sick. And he had
been with Manolo when he had bathed and dressed at the hotel before setting out for
the ring. The odor was not present in the motorcar when they had sat packed tight
together riding to the bull ring. Nor was it distinguishable to any one else but Juan Luis
de la Rosa in the chapel. Neither Marcial nor Chicuelo smelled it neither then nor when
the four of them lined up for the paseo. But Juan Luis was dead white, Blanquet told me,
and he, Blanquet, spoke to him saying, ‘Thou also?’
 “‘So that I cannot breathe,’ Juan Luis said to him. ‘And from thy matador.’
 “‘Pues nada,’ Blanquet said. ‘There is nothing to do. Let us hope we are mistaken.’
 “‘And the others?’ Juan Luis asked Blanquet.
 “‘Nada,’ Blanquet said. ‘Nothing. But this one stinks worse than José at Talavera.’
 “And it was on that afternoon that the bull Pocapena of the ranch of Veragua
destroyed Manolo Granero against the planks of the barrier in front of tendido two in the
Plaza de Toros of Madrid. I was there with Finito and I saw it. The horn entirely
destroyed the cranium, the head of Manolo being wedged under the estribo at the base
of the barrera where the bull had tossed him.”
 “But did you smell anything?” Fernando asked.
 “Nay,” Pilar said. “I was too far away. We were in the seventh row of the tendido three.
It was thus, being at an angle, that I could see all that happened. But that same night
Blanquet who had been under the orders of Joselito when he too was killed told Finito
about it at Fornos, and Finito asked Juan Luis de la Rosa and he would say nothing. But
he nodded his head that it was true. I was present when this happened. So, Inglés, it
may be that thou art deaf to some things as Chicuelo and Marcial Lalanda and all of
their banderilleros and picadors and all of the gente of Juan Luis and Manolo Granero
were deaf to this thing on this day. But Juan Luis and Blanquet were not deaf. Nor am I
deaf to such things.”
 “Why do you say deaf when it is a thing of the nose?” Fernando asked.
 “Leche!” Pilar said. “Thou shouldst be the professor in place of the Inglés. But I could
tell thee of other things, Inglés, and do not doubt what thou simply cannot see nor
cannot hear. Thou canst not hear what a dog hears. Nor canst thou smell what a dog
smells. But already thou hast experienced a little of what can happen to man.”
 Maria put her hand on Robert Jordan’s shoulder and let it rest there and he thought
suddenly, let us finish all this nonsense and take advantage of what time we have. But it
is too early yet. We have to kill this part of the evening. So he said to Pablo, “Thou,
believest thou in this wizardry?”
 “I do not know,” Pablo said. “I am more of thy opinion. No supernatural thing has ever
happened to me. But feai yes certainly. Plenty. But I believe that the Pilar can divine
events from the hand. If she does not lie perhaps it is true that she has smelt such a
thing.”
 “Qué va that I should lie,” Pilar said. “This is not a thing of my invention. This man
Blanquet was a man of extreme seriousness and furthermore very devout. He was no
gypsy but a bourgeois from Valencia. Hast thou never seen him?”
 “Yes,” Robert Jordan said. “I have seen him many times. He was small, gray-faced
and no one handled a cape better. He was quick on his feet as a rabbit.”
 “Exactly,” Pilar said. “He had a gray face from heart trouble and gypsies said that he
carried death with him but that he could flick it away with a cape as you might dust a
“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway 138
table. Yet he, who was no gypsy, smelled death on Joselito when he fought at Talavera.
Although I do not see how he could smell it above the smell of manzanilla. Blanquet
spoke of this afterwards with much diffidence but those to whom he spoke said that it
was a fantasy and that what he had smelled was the life that José led at that time
coming out in sweat from his armpits. But then, later, came this of Manolo Granero in
which Juan Luis de la Rosa also participated. Clearly Juan Luis was a man of very little
honor, but of much sensitiveness in his work and he was also a great layer of women.
But Blanquet was serious and very quiet and completely incapable of telling an untruth.
And I tell you that I smelled death on your colleague who was here.”
 “I do not believe it,” Robert Jordan said. “Also you said that Blanquet smelled this just
before the paseo. Just before the bullfight started. Now this was a successful action
here of you and Kashkin and the train. He was not killed in that. How could you smell it
then?”
 “That has nothing to do with it,” Pilar explained. “In the last season of Ignacio Sanchez
Mejias he smelled so strongly of death that many refused to sit with him in the café. All
gypsies knew of this.”
 “After the death such things are invented,” Robert Jordan argued. “Every one knew
that Sanchez Mejias was on the road to a cornada because he had been too long out of
training, because his style was heavy and dangerous, and because his strength and the
agility in his legs were gone and his reflexes no longer as they had been.”
 “Certainly,” Pilar told him. “All of that is true. But all the gypsies knew also that he
smelled of death and when he would come into the Villa Rosa you would see such
people as Ricardo and Felipe Gonzalez leaving by the small door behind the bar.”
 “They probably owed him money,” Robert Jordan said.
 “It is possible,” Pilar said. “Very possible. But they also smelled the thing and all knew
of it.”
 “What she says is true, Inglés,” the gypsy, Rafael, said. “It is a well-known thing
among us.”
 “I believe nothing of it,” Robert Jordan said.
 “Listen, Inglés,” Anselmo began. “I am against all such wizardry. But this Pilar has the
fame of being very advanced in such things.”
 “But what does it smell like?” Fernando asked. “What odor has it? If there be an odor it
must be a definite odor.”
 “You want to know, Fernandito?” Pilar smiled at him. “You think that you could smell
it?”
 “If it actually exists why should I not smell it as well as another?”
 “Why not?” Pilar was making fun of him, her big hands folded across her knees. “Hast
thou ever been aboard a ship, Fernando?”
 “Nay. And I would not wish to.”
 “Then thou might not recognize it. For part of it is the smell that comes when, on a
ship, there is a storm and the portholes are closed up. Put your nose against the brass
handle of a screwed-tight porthole on a rolling ship that is swaying under you so that you
are faint and hollow in the stomach and you have a part of that smell.”
 “It would be impossible for me to recognize because I will go on no ship,” Fernando
said.
 “I have been on ships several times,” Pilar said. “Both to go to Mexico and to
Venezuela.”
 “What’s the rest of it?” Robert Jordan asked. Pilar looked at him mockingly,
remembering now, proudly, her voyages.
 “All right, Inglés. Learn. That’s the thing. Learn. All right. After that of the ship you must
go down the hill in Madrid to the Puente de Toledo early in the morning to the matadero
and stand there on the wet paving when there is a fog from the Manzanares and wait for
the old women who go before daylight to drink the blood of the beasts that are
slaughtered. When such an old woman comes out of the matadero, holding her shawl
around hei with her face gray and her eyes hollow, and the whiskers of age on her chin,
“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway 139
and on her cheeks, set in the waxen white of her face as the sprouts grow from the seed
of the bean, not bristles, but pale sprouts in the death of her face; put your arms tight
around her, Inglés, and hold her to you and kiss her on the mouth and you will know the
second part that odor is made of.”
 “That one has taken my appetite,” the gypsy said. “That of the sprouts was too much.”
 “Do you want to hear some more?” Pilar asked Robert Jordan.
 “Surely,” he said. “If it is necessary for one to learn let us learn.”
 “That of the sprouts in the face of the old women sickens me,” the gypsy said. “Why
should that occur in old women, Pilar? With us it is not so.”
 “Nay,” Pilar mocked at him. “With us the old woman, who was so slender in her youth,
except of course for the perpetual bulge that is the mark of her husband’s favor, that
every gypsy pushes always before her—”
 “Do not speak thus,” Rafael said. “It is ignoble.”
 “So thou art hurt,” Pilar said. “Hast thou ever seen a Gitana who was not about to
have, or just to have had, a child?”
 “Thou.”
 “Leave it,” Pilar said. “There is no one who cannot be hurt. What I was saying is that
age brings its own form of ugliness to all. There is no need to detail it. But if the Inglés
must learn that odor that he covets to recognize he must go to the matadero early in the
morning.”
 “I will go,” Robert Jordan said. “But I will get the odor as they pass without kissing one.
I fear the sprouts, too, as Rafael does.”
 “Kiss one,” Pilar said. “Kiss one, Inglés, for thy knowledge’s sake and then, with this in
thy nostrils, walk back up into the city and when thou seest a refuse pail with dead
flowers in it plunge thy nose deep into it and inhale so that scent mixes with those thou
hast already in thy nasal passages.”
 “Now have I done it,” Robert Jordan said. “What flowers were they?”
 “Chrysanthemums.”
 “Continue,” Robert Jordan said. “I smell them.”
 “Then,” Pilar went on, “it is important that the day be in autumn with rain, or at least
some fog, or early winter even and now thou shouldst continue to walk through the city
and down the Calle de Salud smelling what thou wilt smell where they are sweeping out
the casas de putas and emptying the siop jars into the drains and, with this odor of
love’s labor lost mixed sweetly with soapy water and cigarette butts only faintly reaching
thy nostrils, thou shouldst go on to the JardIn Botánico where at night those girls who
can no longer work in the houses do their work against the iron gates of the park and
the iron picketed fences and upon the sidewalks. It is there in the shadow of the trees
against the iron railings that they will perform all that a man wishes; from the simplest
requests at a remuneration of ten centimos up to a peseta for that great act that we are
born to and there, on a dead flower bed that has not yet been plucked out and
replanted, and so serves to soften the earth that is so much softer than the sidewalk,
thou wilt find an abandoned gunny sack with the odor of the wet earth, the dead flowers,
and the doings of that night. In this sack will be contained the essence of it all, both the
dead earth and the dead stalks of the flowers and their rotted blooms and the smell that
is both the death and birth of man. Thou wilt wrap this sack around thy head and try to
breathe through it.”
 “No.”
 “Yes,” Pilar said. “Thou wilt wrap this sack around thy head and try to breathe and
then, if thou hast not lost any of the previous odors, when thou inhalest deeply, thou wilt
smell the odor of deathto-come as we know it.”
 “All right,” Robert Jordan said. “And you say Kashkin smelt like that when he was
here?”
 “Yes.”
 “Well,” said Robert Jordan gravely. “If that is true it is a good thing that I shot him.”
 “Olé,” the gypsy said. The others laughed.
“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway 140
 “Very good,” Primitivo approved. “That should hold her for a while.”
 “But Pilar,” Fernando said. “Surely you could not expect one of Don Roberto’s
education to do such vile things.”
 “No,” Pilar agreed.
 “All of that is of the utmost repugnance.”
 “Yes,” Pilar agreed.
 “You would not expect him actually to perform those degrading acts?”
 “No,” Pilar said. “Go to bed, will you?”
 “But, Pilar—” Fernando went on.
 “Shut up, will you?” Pilar said to him suddenly and viciously. “Do not make a fool of
thyself and I will try not to make a fool of myself talking with people who cannot
understand what one speaks of.”
 “I confess I do not understand,” Fernando began.
 “Don’t confess and don’t try to understand,” Pilar said. “Is it still snowing outside?”
 Robert Jordan went to the mouth of the cave, lifted the blanket and looked out. It was
clear and cold in the night outside and no snow was falling. He looked through the tree
trunks where the whiteness lay and up through the trees to where the sky was now
clear. The air came into his lungs sharp and cold as he breathed.
 El Sordo will leave plenty of tracks if he has stolen horses tonight, he thought.
 He dropped the blanket and came back into the smoky cave. “It is clear,” he said. “The
storm is over.”
20
 Now in the night he lay and waited for the girl to come to him. There was no wind now
and the pines were still in the night. The trunks of the pines projected from the snow that
covered all the ground, and he lay in the robe feeling the suppleness of the bed under
him that he had made, his legs stretched long against the warmth of the robe, the air
sharp and cold on his head and in his nostrils as he breathed. Under his head, as he lay
on his side, was the bulge of the trousers and the coat that he had wrapped around his
shoes to make a pillow and against his side was the cold metal of the big automatic
pistol he had taken from the holster when he undressed and fastened by its lanyard to
his right wrist. He pushed the pistol away and settled deeper into the robe as he
watched, across the snow, the dark break in the rocks that was the entrance to the
cave. The sky was clear and there was enough light reflected from the snow to see the
trunks of the trees and the bulk of the rocks where the cave was.
 Earlier in the evening he had taken the ax and gone outside of the cave and walked
through the new snow to the edge of the clearing and cut down a small spruce tree. In
the dark he had dragged it, butt first, to the lee of the rock wall. There close to the rock,
he had held the tree upright, holding the trunk firm with one hand, and, holding the axhaft close to the head had lopped off all the boughs until he had a pile of them. Then,
leaving the pile of boughs, he had laid the bare pole of the trunk down in the snow and
gone into the cave to get a slab of wood he had seen against the wall. With this slab he
scraped the ground clear of the snow along the rock wall and then picked up his boughs
and shaking them clean of snow laid them in rows, like overlapping plumes, until he had
a bed. He put the pole across the foot of the bough bed to hold the branches in place
and pegged it firm with two pointed pieces of wood he split from the edge of the slab.
 Then he carried the slab and the ax back into the cave, ducking under the blanket as
he came in, and leaned them both against the wall.
 “What do you do outside?” Pilar had asked.
 “I made a bed.”
 “Don’t cut pieces from my new shelf for thy bed.”
 “I am sorry.”
 “It has no importance,” she said. “There are more slabs at the sawmill. What sort of
bed hast thou made?”
“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway 141
 “As in my country.”
 “Then sleep well on it,” she had said and Robert Jordan had opened one of the packs
and pulled the robe out and replaced those things wrapped in it back in the pack and
carried the robe out, ducking under the blanket again, and spread it over the boughs so
that the closed end of the robe was against the pole that was pegged cross-wise at the
foot of the bed. The open head of the robe was protected by the rock wall of the cliff.
Then he went back into the cave for his packs but Pilar said, “They can sleep with me as
last night.”
 “Will you not have sentries?” he asked. “The night is clear and the storm is over.”
 “Fernando goes,” Pilar said.
 Maria was in the back of the cave and Robert Jordan could not see her.
 “Good night to every one,” he had said. “I am going to sleep.”
 Of the others, who were laying out blankets and bedrolls on the floor in front of the
cooking fire, pushing back the slab tables and the rawhide-covered stools to make
sleeping space, Primitivo and Andrés looked up and said, “Buenas noches.”
 Anselmo was already asleep in a corner, rolled in his blanket and his cape, not even
his nose showing. Pablo was asleep in his chair.
 “Do you want a sheep hide for thy bed?” Pilar asked Robert Jordan softly.
 “Nay,” he said. “Thank thee. I do not need it.”
 “Sleep well,” she said. “I will respond for thy material.”
 Fernando had gone out with him and stood a moment where Robert Jordan had
spread the sleeping robe.
 “You have a curious idea to sleep in the open, Don Roberto,” he said standing there in
the dark, muffled in his blanket cape, his carbine slung over his shoulder.
 “I am accustomed to it. Good night.”
 “Since you are accustomed to it.”
 “When are you relieved?”
 “At four.”
 “There is much cold between now and then.”
 “I am accustomed to it,” Fernando said.
 “Since, then, you are accustomed to it—” Robert Jordan said politely.
 “Yes,” Fernando agreed. “Now I must get up there. Good night, Don Roberto.”
 “Good night, Fernando.”
 Then he had made a pillow of the things he took off and gotten into the robe and then
lain and waited, feeling the spring of the boughs under the flannelly, feathered lightness
of the robe warmth, watching the mouth of the cave across the snow; feeling his heart
beat as he waited.
 The night was clear and his head felt as clear and cold as the air. He smelled the odor
of the pine boughs under him, the piney smell of the crushed needles and the sharper
odor of the resinous sap from the cut limbs. Pilar, he thought. Pilar and the smell of
death. This is the smell I love. This and fresh-cut clover, the crushed sage as you ride
after cattle, wood-smoke and the burning leaves of autumn. That must be the odor of
nostalgia, the smell of the smoke from the piles of raked leaves burning in the streets in
the fall in Missoula. Which would you rather smell? Sweet grass the Indians used in their
baskets? Smoked leather? The odor of the ground in the spring after rain? The smell of
the sea as you walk through the gorse on a headland in Galicia? Or the wind from the
land as you come in toward Cuba in the dark? That was the odor of the cactus flowers,
mimosa and the sea-grape shrubs. Or would you rather smell frying bacon in the
morning when you are hungry? Or coffee in the morning? Or a Jonathan apple as you
bit into it? Or a cider mill in the grinding, or bread fresh from the oven? You must be
hungry, he thought, and he lay on his side and watched the entrance of the cave in the
light that the stars reflected from the snow.
 Some one came out from under the blanket and he could see whoever it was standing
by the break in the rock that made the entrance. Then he heard a slithering sound in the
snow and then whoever it was ducked down and went back in.
“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway 142
 I suppose she won’t come until they are all asleep, he thought. It is a waste of time.
The night is half gone. Oh, Maria. Come now quickly, Maria, for there is little time. He
heard the soft sound of snow falling from a branch onto the snow on the ground. A little
wind was rising. He felt it on his face. Suddenly he felt a panic that she might not come.
The wind rising now reminded him how soon it would be morning. More snow fell from
the branches as he heard the wind now moving the pine tops.
 Come now, Maria. Please come here now quickly, he thought. Oh, come here now.
Do not wait. There is no importance any more to your waiting until they are asleep.
 Then he saw her coming out from under the blanket that covered the cave mouth. She
stood there a moment and he knew it was she but he could not see what she was doing.
He whistled a low whistle and she was still at the cave mouth doing something in the
darkness of the rock shadow. Then she came running, carrying something in her hands
and he saw her running long-legged through the snow. Then she was kneeling by the
robe, her head pushed hard against him, slapping snow from her feet. She kissed him
and handed him her bundle.
 “Put it with thy pillow,” she said. “I took these off there to save time.”
 “You came barefoot through the snow?”
 “Yes,” she said, “and wearing only my wedding shirt.”
 He held her close and tight in his arms and she rubbed her head against his chin.
 “Avoid the feet,” she said. “They are very cold, Roberto.”
 “Put them here and warm them.”
 “Nay,” she said. “They will warm quickly. But say quickly now that you love me.”
 “I love thee.”
 “Good. Good. Good.”
 “I love thee, little rabbit.”
 “Do you love my wedding shirt?”
 “It is the same one as always.”
 “Yes. As last night. It is my wedding shirt.”
 “Put thy feet here.”
 “Nay, that would be abusive. They will warm of themselves. They are warm to me. It is
only that the snow has made them cold toward thee. Say it again.”
 “I love thee, my little rabbit.”
 “I love thee, too, and I am thy wife.”
 “Were they asleep?”
 “No,” she said. “But I could support it no longer. And what importance has it?”
 “None,” he said, and felt her against him, slim and long and warmly lovely. “No other
thing has importance.”
 “Put thy hand on my head,” she said, “and then let me see if I can kiss thee.
 “Was it well?” she asked.
 “Yes,” he said. “Take off thy wedding shirt.”
 “You think I should?”
 “Yes, if thou wilt not be cold.”
 “Qué va, cold. I am on fire.”
 “I, too. But afterwards thou wilt not be cold?”
 “No. Afterwards we will be as one animal of the forest and be so close that neither one
can tell that one of us is one and not the other. Can you not feel my heart be your
heart?”
 “Yes. There is no difference.”
 “Now, feel. I am thee and thou art me and all of one is the other. And I love thee, oh, I
love thee so. Are you not truly one? Canst thou not feel it?”
 “Yes,” he said. “It is true.”
 “And feel now. Thou hast no heart but mine.”
 “Nor any other legs, nor feet, nor of the body.”
 “But we are different,” she said. “I would have us exactly the same.”
 “You do not mean that.”
“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway 143
 “Yes I do. I do. That is a thing I had to tell thee.”
 “You do not mean that.”
 “Perhaps I do not,” she said speaking softly with her lips against his shoulder. “But I
wished to say it. Since we are different I am glad that thou art Roberto and I Maria. But if
thou should ever wish to change I would be glad to change. I would be thee because I
love thee so.”
 “I do not wish to change. It is better to be one and each one to be the one he is.”
 “But we will be one now and there will never be a separate one.” Then she said, “I will
be thee when thou are not there. Oh, I love thee so and I must care well for thee.”
 “Maria.”
 “Yes.”
 “Maria.”
 “Yes.”
 “Maria.”
 “Oh, yes. Please.”
 “Art thou not cold?”
 “Oh, no. Pull the robe over thy shoulders.”
 “Maria.”
 “I cannot speak.”
 “Oh, Maria. Maria. Maria.”
 Then afterwards, close, with the night cold outside, in the long warmth of the robe, her
head touching his cheek, she lay quiet and happy against him and then said softly, “And
thou?”
 “Como tu,” he said.
 “Yes,” she said. “But it was not as this afternoon.”
 “No.”
 “But I loved it more. One does not need to die.”
 “Ojala no,” he said. “I hope not.”
 “I did not mean that.”
 “I know. I know what thou meanest. We mean the same.”
 “Then why did you say that instead of what I meant?”
 “With a man there is a difference.”
 “Then I am glad that we are different.”
 “And so am I,” he said. “But I understood about the dying. I only spoke thus, as a man,
from habit. I feel the same as thee.”
 “However thou art and however thou speakest is how I would have thee be.”
 “And I love thee and I love thy name, Maria.”
 “It is a common name.”
 “No,” he said. “It is not common.”
 “Now should we sleep?” she said. “I could sleep easily.”
 “Let us sleep,” he said, and he felt the long light body, warm against him, comforting
against him, abolishing loneliness against him, magically, by a simple touching of flanks,
of shoulders and of feet, making an alliance against death with him, and he said, “Sleep
well, little long rabbit.”
 She said, “I am asleep already.”
 “I am going to sleep,” he said. “Sleep well, beloved.” Then he was asleep and happy
as he slept.
 But in the night he woke and held her tight as though she were all of life and it was
being taken from him. He held her feeling she was all of life there was and it was true.
But she was sleeping well and soundly and she did not wake. So he rolled away onto
his side and pulled the robe over her head and kissed her once on her neck under the
robe and then pulled the pistol lanyard up and put the pistol by his side where he could
reach it handily and then he lay there in the night thinking.
“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway 144
21
 A warm wind came with daylight and he could hear the snow melting in the trees and
the heavy sound of its falling. It was a late spring morning. He knew with the first breath
he drew that the snow had been only a freak storm in the mountains and it would be
gone by noon. Then he heard a horse coming, the hoofs balled with the wet snow
thumping dully as the horseman trotted. He heard the noise of a carbine scabbard
slapping loosely and the creak of leather.
 “Maria,” he said, and shook the girl’s shoulder to waken her. “Keep thyself under the
robe,” and he buttoned his shirt with one hand and held the automatic pistol in the othet
loosening the safety catch with his thumb. He saw the girl’s cropped head disappear
with a jerk under the robe and then he saw the horseman coming through the trees. He
crouched now in the robe and holding the pistol in both hands aimed it at the man as he
rode toward him. He had never seen this man before.
 The horseman was almost opposite him now. He was riding a big gray gelding and he
wore a khaki beret, a blanket cape like a poncho, and heavy black boots. From the
scabbard on the right of his saddle projected the stock and the long oblong clip of a
short automatic rifle. He had a young, hard face and at this moment he saw Robert
Jordan.
 He reached his hand down toward the scabbard and as he swung low, turning and
jerking at the scabbard, Robert Jordan saw the scarlet of the formalized device he wore
on the left breast of his khaki blanket cape.
 Aiming at the center of his chest, a little lower than the device, Robert Jordan fired.
 The pistol roared in the snowy woods.
 The horse plunged as though he had been spurred and the young man, still tugging at
the scabbard, slid over toward the ground, his right foot caught in the stirrup. The horse
broke off through the trees dragging him, bumping, face downward, and Robert Jordan
stood up holding the pistol now in one hand.
 The big gray horse was galloping through the pines. There was a broad swath in the
snow where the man dragged with a scarlet streak along one side of it. People were
coming out of the mouth of the cave. Robert Jordan reached down and unrolled his
trousers from the pillow and began to put them on.
 “Get thee dressed,” he said to Maria.
 Overhead he heard the noise of a plane flying very high. Through the trees he saw
where the gray horse had stopped and was standing, his rider still hanging face down
from the stirrup.
 “Go catch that horse,” he called to Primitivo who had started over toward him. Then,
“Who was on guard at the top?”
 “Rafael,” Pilar said from the cave. She stood there, her hair still down her back in two
braids.
 “There’s cavalry out,” Robert Jordan said. “Get your damned gun up there.”
 He heard Pilar call, “Agustín,” into the cave. Then she went into the cave and then two
men came running out, one with the automatic rifle with its tripod swung on his shoulder;
the other with a sackful of the pans.
 “Get up there with them,” Robert Jordan said to Anselmo. “You lie beside the gun and
hold the legs still,” he said.
 The three of them went up the trail through the woods at a run.
 The sun had not yet come up over the tops of the mountains and Robert Jordan stood
straight buttoning his trousers and tightening his belt, the big pistol hanging from the
lanyard on his wrist. He put the pistol in its holster on his belt and slipped the knot down
on the lanyard and passed the ioop over his head.
 Somebody will choke you with that sometime, he thought. Well, this has done it. He
took the pistol out of the holster, removed the clip, inserted one of the cartridges from
the row alongside of the holster and shoved the clip back into the butt of the pistol.
 He looked through the trees to where Primitivo, holding the reins of the horse, was
“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway 145
twisting the rider’s foot out of the stirrup. The body lay face down in the snow and as he
watched Primitivo was going through the pockets.
 “Come on,” he called. “Bring the horse.”
 As he knelt to put on his rope-soled shoes, Robert Jordan could feel Maria against his
knees, dressing herself under the robe. She had no place in his life now.
 That cavalryman did not expect anything, he was thinking. He was not following horse
tracks and he was not even properly alert, let alone alarmed. He was not even following
the tracks up to the post. He must have been one of a patrol scattered out in these hills.
But when the patrol misses him they will follow his tracks here. Unless the snow melts
first, he thought. Unless something happens to the patrol.
 “You better get down below,” he said to Pablo.
 They were all out of the cave now, standing there with the carbines and with grenades
on their belts. Pilar held a leather bag of grenades toward Robert Jordan and he took
three and put them in his pocket. He ducked into the cave, found his two packs, opened
the one with the submachine gun in it and took out the barrel and stock, slipped the
stock onto the forward assembly and put one clip into the gun and three in his pockets.
He locked the pack and started for the door. I’ve got two pockets full of hardware, he
thought. I hope the seams hold. He came out of the cave and said to Pablo, “I’m going
up above. Can Agustín shoot that gun?”
 “Yes,” Pablo said. He was watching Primitivo leading up the horse.
 “Mira qué caballo,” he said. “Look, what a horse.”
 The big gray was sweating and shivering a little and Robert Jordan patted him on the
withers.
 “I will put him with the others,” Pablo said.
 “No,” Robert Jordan said. “He has made tracks into here. He must make them out.”
 “True,” agreed Pablo. “I will ride him out and will hide him and bring him in when the
snow is melted. Thou hast much head today, Inglés.”
 “Send some one below,” Robert Jordan said. “We’ve got to get up there.”
 “It is not necessary,” Pablo said. “Horsemen cannot come that way. But we can get
out, by there and by two other places. It is better not to make tracks if there are planes
coming. Give me the bota with wine, Pilar.”
 “To go off and get drunk,” Pilar said. “Here, take these instead.” He reached over and
put two of the grenades in his pockets.
 “Qué va, to get drunk,” Pablo said. “There is gravity in the situation. But give me the
bota. I do not like to do all this on water.”
 He reached his arms up, took the reins and swung up into the saddle. He grinned and
patted the nervous horse. Robert Jordan saw him rub his leg along the horse’s flank
affectionately.
 “Qué caballo más bonito,” he said and patted the big gray again. “Qué caballo más
hermoso. Come on. The faster this gets out of here the better.”
 He reached down and pulled the light automatic rifle with its ventilated barrel, really a
submachine gun built to take the 9 mm. pistol cartridge, from the scabbard, and looked
at it. “Look how they are armed,” he said. “Look at modern cavalry.”
 “There’s modern cavalry over there on his face,” Robert Jordan said. “Vamonos.”
 “Do you, Andrés, saddle and hold the horses in readiness. If you hear firing bring them
up to the woods behind the gap. Come with thy arms and leave the women to hold the
horses. Fernando, see that my sacks are brought also. Above all, that my sacks are
brought carefully. Thou to look after my sacks, too,” he said to Pilar. “Thou to verify that
they come with the horses. Vamonos,” he said. “Let us go.”
 “The Maria and I will prepare all for leaving,” Pilar said. Then to Robert Jordan, “Look
at him,” nodding at Pablo on the gray horse, sitting him in the heavy-thighed herdsman
manner, the horse’s nostrils widening as Pablo replaced the clip in the automatic rifle.
“See what a horse has done for him.”
 “That I should have two horses,” Robert Jordan said fervently.
 “Danger is thy horse.”
“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway 146
 “Then give me a mule,” Robert Jordan grinned.
 “Strip me that,” he said to Pilar and jerked his head toward where the man lay face
down in the snow. “And bring everything, all the letters and papers, and put them in the
outside pocket of my sack. Everything, understand?”
 “Yes.”
 “Vamonos,” he said.
 Pablo rode ahead and the two men followed in a single file in order not to track up the
snow. Robert Jordan carried the submachine gun muzzle down, carrying it by its forward
hand grip. I wish it took the same ammunition that saddle gun takes, he thought. But it
doesn’t. This is a German gun. This was old Kashkin’s gun.
 The sun was coming over the mountains now. A warm wind was blowing and the
snow was melting. It was a lovely late spring morning.
 Robert Jordan looked back and saw Maria now standing with Pilar. Then she came
running up the trail. He dropped behind Primitivo to speak to her.
 “Thou,” she said. “Can I go with thee?”
 “No. Help Pilar.”
 She was walking behind him and put her hand on his arm.
 “I’m coming.”
 “Nay.”
 She kept on walking close behind him.
 “I could hold the legs of the gun in the way thou told Anselmo.”
 “Thou wilt hold no legs. Neither of guns nor of nothing.”
 Walking beside him she reached forward and put her hand in his pocket.
 “No,” he said. “But take good care of thy wedding shirt.”
 “Kiss me,” she said, “if thou goest.”
 “Thou art shameless,” he said.
 “Yes,” she said. “Totally.”
 “Get thee back now. There is much work to do. We may fight here if they follow these
horse tracks.”
 “Thou,” she said. “Didst thee see what he wore on his chest?”
 “Yes. Why not?”
 “It was the Sacred Heart.”
 “Yes. All the people of Navarre wear it.”
 “And thou shot for that?”
 “No. Below it. Get thee back now.”
 “Thou,” she said. “I saw all.”
 “Thou saw nothing. One man. One man from a horse. Vete. Get thee back.”
 “Say that you love me.”
 “No. Not now.”
 “Not love me now?”
 “Déjamos. Get thee back. One does not do that and love all at the same moment.”
 “I want to go to hold the legs of the gun and while it speaks love thee all in the same
moment.”
 “Thou art crazy. Get thee back now.”
 “I am crazy,” she said. “I love thee.”
 “Then get thee back.”
 “Good. I go. And if thou dost not love me, I love thee enough for both.”
 He looked at her and smiled through his thinking.
 “When you hear firing,” he said, “come with the horses. Aid the Pilar with my sacks. It
is possible there will be nothing. I hope so.”
 “I go,” she said. “Look what a horse Pablo rides.”
 The big gray was moving ahead up the trail.
 “Yes. But go.”
 “I go.”
 Her fist, clenched tight in his pocket, beat hard against his thigh. He looked at her and
“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway 147
saw there were tears in her eyes. She pulled her fist out of his pocket and put both arms
tight around his neck and kissed him.
 “I go,” she said. “Me voy. I go.”
 He looked back and saw her standing there, the first morning sunlight on her brown
face and the cropped, tawny, burned-gold hair. She lifted her fist at him and turned and
walked back down the trail, her head down.
 Primitivo turned around and looked after her.
 “If she did not have her hair cut so short she would be a pretty girl,” he said.
 “Yes,” Robert Jordan said. He was thinking of something else.
 “How is she in the bed?” Primitivo asked.
 “What?”
 “In the bed.”
 “Watch thy mouth.”
 “One should not be offended when—”
 “Leave it,” Robert Jordan said. He was looking at the position.
22
 “Cut me pine branches,” Robert Jordan said to Primitivo, “and bring them quickly.”
 “I do not like the gun there,” he said to Agustín.
 “Why?”
 “Place it over there,” Robert Jordan pointed, “and later I will tell thee.”
 “Here, thus. Let me help thee. Here,” he said, then squatted down.
 He looked out across the narrow oblong, noting the height of the rocks on either side.
 “It must be farther,” he said, “farther out. Good. Here. That will do until it can be done
properly. There. Put the stones there. Here is one. Put another there at the side. Leave
room for the muzzle to swing. The stone must be farther to this side. Anselmo. Get thee
down to the cave and bring me an ax. Quickly.”
 “Have you never had a proper emplacement for the gun?” he said to Agustín.
 “We always placed it here.”
 “Kashkin never said to put it there?”
 “No. The gun was brought after he left.”
 “Did no one bring it who knew how to use it?”
 “No. It was brought by porters.”
 “What a way to do things,” Robert Jordan said. “It was just given to you without
instruction?”
 “Yes, as a gift might be given. One for us and one for El Sordo. Four men brought
them. Anselmo guided them.”
 “It was a wonder they did not lose them with four men to cross the lines.”
 “I thought so, too,” Agustín said. “I thought those who sent them meant for them to be
lost. But Anselmo brought them well.”
 “You know how to handle it?”
 “Yes. I have experimented. I know. Pablo knows. Primitivo knows. So does Fernando.
We have made a study of taking it apart and putting it together on the table in the cave.
Once we had it apart and could not get it together for two days. Since then we have not
had it apart.”
 “Does it shoot now?”
 “Yes. But we do not let the gypsy nor others frig with it.”
 “You see? From there it was useless,” he said. “Look. Those rocks which should
protect your flanks give cover to those who will attack you. With such a gun you must
seek a flatness over which to fire. Also you must take them sideways. See? Look now.
All that is dominated.”
 “I see,” said Agustín. “But we have never fought in defense except when our town was
taken. At the train there were soldiers with the máquina.”
 “Then we will all learn together,” Robert Jordan said. “There are a few things to
“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway 148
observe. Where is the gypsy who should be here?”
 “I do not know.”
 “Where is it possible for him to be?”
 “I do not know.”
 Pablo had ridden out through the pass and turned once and ridden in a circle across
the level space at the top that was the field of fire for the automatic rifle. Now Robert
Jordan watched him riding down the slope alongside the tracks the horse had left when
he was ridden in. He disappeared in the trees turning to the left.
 I hope he doesn’t run right into cavalry, Robert Jordan thought. I’m afraid we’d have
him right here in our laps.
 Primitivo brought the pine branches and Robert Jordan stuck them through the snow
into the unfrozen earth, arching them over the gun from either side.
 “Bring more,” he said. “There must be cover for the two men who serve it. This is not
good but it will serve until the ax comes. Listen,” he said, “if you hear a plane lie flat
wherever thou art in the shadows of the rocks. I am here with the gun.”
 Now with the sun up and the warm wind blowing it was pleasant on the side of the
rocks where the sun shone. Four horses, Robert Jordan thought. The two women and
me, Anselmo, Primitivo, Fernando, Agustín, what the hell is the name of the other
brother? That’s eight. Not counting the gypsy. Makes nine. Plus Pablo gone with one
horse makes ten. Andrés is his name. The other brother. Plus the other, Eladio. Makes
ten. That’s not one-half a horse apiece. Three men can hold this and four can get away.
Five with Pablo. That’s two left over. Three with Eladio. Where the hell is he?
 God knows what will happen to Sordo today if they picked up the trail of those horses
in the snow. That was tough; the snow stopping that way. But it melting today will even
things up. But not for Sordo. I’m afraid it’s too late to even it up for Sordo.
 If we can last through today and not have to fight we can swing the whole show
tomorrow with what we have. I know we can. Not well, maybe. Not as it should be, to be
foolproof, not as we would have done; but using everybody we can swing it. If we don’t
have to fight today. God help us if we have to fight today.
 I don’t know any place better to lay up in the meantime than this. If we move now we
only leave tracks. This is as good a place as any and if the worst gets to be the worst
there are three ways out of this place. There is the dark then to come and from
wherever we are in these hills, I can reach and do the bridge at daylight. I don’t know
why I worried about it before. It seems easy enough now. I hope they get the planes up
on time for once. I certainly hope that. Tomorrow is going to be a day with dust on the
road.
 Well, today will be very interesting or very dull. Thank God we’ve got that cavalry
mount out and away from here. I don’t think even if they ride right up here they will go in
the way those tracks are now. They’ll think he stopped and circled and they’ll pick up
Pablo’s tracks. I wonder where the old swine will go. He’ll probably leave tracks like an
old bull elk spooking out of the country and work way up and then when the snow melts
circle back below. That horse certainly did things for him. Of course he may have just
mucked off with him too. Well, he should be able to take care of himself. He’s been
doing this a long time. I wouldn’t trust him farther than you can throw Mount Everest,
though.
 I suppose it’s smarter to use these rocks and build a good blind for this gun than to
make a proper emplacement for it. You’d be digging and get caught with your pants
down if they come or if the planes come. She will hold this, the way she is, as long as it
is any use to hold it, and anyway I can’t stay to fight. I have to get out of here with that
stuff and I’m going to take Anselmo with me. Who would stay to cover us while we got
away if we have to fight here?
 Just then, while he was watching all of the country that was visible, he saw the gypsy
coming through the rocks to the left. He was walking with a loose, high-hipped, sloppy
swing, his carbine was slung on his back, his brown face was grinning and he carried
two big hares, one in each hand. He carried them by the legs, heads swinging.
“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway 149
 “Hola, Roberto,” he called cheerfully.
 Robert Jordan put his hand to his mouth, and the gypsy looked startled. He slid over
behind the rocks to where Robert Jordan was crouched beside the brush-shielded
automatic rifle. He crouched down and laid the hares in the snow. Robert Jordan looked
up at him.
 “You hijo de la gran puta!” he said softly. “Where the obscenity have you been?”
 “I tracked them,” the gypsy said. “I got them both. They had made love in the snow.”
 “And thy post?”
 “It was not for long,” the gypsy whispered. “What passes? Is there an alarm?”
 “There is cavalry out.”
 “Rediós!” the gypsy said. “Hast thou seen them?”
 “There is one at the camp now,” Robert Jordan said. “He came for breakfast.”
 “I thought I heard a shot or something like one,” the gypsy said. “I obscenity in the
milk! Did he come through here?”
 “Here. Thy post.”
 “Ay, mi madre!” the gypsy said. “I am a poor, unlucky man.”
 “If thou wert not a gypsy, I would shoot thee.”
 “No, Roberto. Don’t say that. I am sorry. It was the hares. Before daylight I heard the
male thumping in the snow. You cannot imagine what a debauch they were engaged in.
I went toward the noise but they were gone. I followed the tracks in the snow and high
up I found them together and slew them both. Feel the fatness of the two for this time of
year. Think what the Pilar will do with those two. I am sorry, Roberto, as sorry as thee.
Was the cavalryman killed?”
 “Yes.”
 “By thee?”
 “Yes.”
 “Qué tio!” the gypsy said in open flattery. “Thou art a veritable phenomenon.”
 “Thy mother!” Robert Jordan said. He could not help grinning at the gypsy. “Take thy
hares to camp and bring us up some breakfast.”
 He put a hand out and felt of the hares that lay limp, long, heavy, thick-furred, bigfooted and long-eared in the snow, their round dark eyes open.
 “They are fat,” he said.
 “Fat!” the gypsy said. “There’s a tub of lard on the ribs of each one. In my life have I
never dreamed of such hares.”
 “Go then,” Robert Jordan said, “and come quickly with the breakfast and bring to me
the documentation of that requeté. Ask Pilar for it.”
 “You are not angry with me, Roberto?”
 “Not angry. Disgusted that you should leave your post. Suppose it had been a troop of
cavalry?”
 “Rediós,” the gypsy said. “How reasonable you are.”
 “Listen to me. You cannot leave a post again like that. Never. I do not speak of
shooting lightly.”
 “Of course not. And another thing. Never would such an opportunity as the two hares
present itself again. Not in the life of one man.”
 “Anda!” Robert Jordan said. “And hurry back.”
 The gypsy picked up the two hares and slipped back through the rocks and Robert
Jordan looked out across the flat opening and the slopes of the hill below. Two crows
circled overhead and then lit in a pine tree below. Another crow joined them and Robert
Jordan, watching them, thought: those are my sentinels. As long as those are quiet
there is no one coming through the trees.
 The gypsy, he thought. He is truly worthless. He has no political development, nor any
discipline, and you could not rely on him for anything. But I need him for tomorrow. I
have a use for him tomorrow. It’s odd to see a gypsy in a war. They should be exempted
like conscientious objectors. Or as the physically and mentally unfit. They are worthless.
But conscientious objectors weren’t exempted in this war. No one was exempted. It
“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway 150
came to one and all alike. Well, it had come here now to this lazy outfit. They had it now.
 Agustín and Primitivo came up with the brush and Robert Jordan built a good blind for
the automatic rifle, a blind that would conceal the gun from the air and that would look
natural from the forest. He showed them where to place a man high in the rocks to the
right where he could see all the country below and to the right, and another where he
could command the only stretch where the left wall might be climbed.
 “Do not fire if you see any one from there,” Robert Jordan said. “Roll a rock down as a
warning, a small rock, and signal to us with thy rifle, thus,” he lifted the rifle and held it
over his head as though guarding it. “Thus for numbers,” he lifted the rifle up and down.
“If they are dismounted point thy rifle muzzle at the ground. Thus. Do not fire from there
until thou hearest the máquina fire. Shoot at a man’s knees when you shoot from that
height. If you hear me whistle twice on this whistle get down, keeping behind cover, and
come to these rocks where the máquina is.”
 Primitivo raised the rifle.
 “I understand,” he said. “It is very simple.”
 “Send first the small rock as a warning and indicate the direction and the number. See
that you are not seen.”
 “Yes,” Primitivo said. “If I can throw a grenade?”
 “Not until the máquina has spoken. It may be that cavalry will come searching for their
comrade and still not try to enter. They may follow the tracks of Pablo. We do not want
combat if it can be avoided. Above all that we should avoid it. Now get up there.”
 “Me voy,” Primitivo said, and climbed up into the high rocks with his carbine.
 “Thou, Agustín,” Robert Jordan said. “What do you know of the gun?”
 Agustín squatted there, tall, black, stubbly joweled, with his sunken eyes and thin
mouth and his big work-worn hands.
 “Pues, to load it. To aim it. To shoot it. Nothing more.”
 “You must not fire until they are within fifty meters and only when you are sure they
will be coming into the pass which leads to the cave,” Robert Jordan said.
 “Yes. How far is that?”
 “That rock.”
 “If there is an officer shoot him first. Then move the gun onto the others. Move very
slowly. It takes little movement. I will teach Fernando to tap it. Hold it tight so that it does
not jump and sight carefully and do not fire more than six shots at a time if you can help
it. For the fire of the gun jumps upward. But each time fire at one man and then move
from him to another. At a man on a horse, shoot at his belly.”
 “Yes.”
 “One man should hold the tripod still so that the gun does not jump. Thus. He will load
the gun for thee.”
 “And where will you be?”
 “I will be here on the left. Above, where I can see all and I will cover thy left with this
small máquina. Here. If they should come it would be possible to make a massacre. But
you must not fire until they are that close.”
 “I believe that we could make a massacre. Menuda matanza!”
 “But I hope they do not come.”
 “If it were not for thy bridge we could make a massacre here and get out.”
 “It would avail nothing. That would serve no purpose. The bridge is a part of a plan to
win the war. This would be nothing. This would be an incident. A nothing.”
 “Qué va, nothing. Every fascist dead is a fascist less.”
 “Yes. But with this of the bridge we can take Segovia. The Capital of a Province. Think
of that. It will be the first one we will take.”
 “Thou believest in this seriously? That we can take Segovia?”
 “Yes. It is possible with the bridge blown correctly.”
 “I would like to have the massacre here and the bridge, too.”
 “Thou hast much appetite,” Robert Jordan told him.
 All this time he had been watching the crows. Now he saw one was watching
“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway 151
something. The bird cawed and flew up. But the other crow still stayed in the tree.
Robert Jordan looked up toward Primitivo’s place high in the rocks. He saw him
watching out over the country below but he made no signal. Robert Jordan leaned
forward and worked the lock on the automatic rifle, saw the round in the chamber and let
the lock down. The crow was still there in the tree. The other circled wide over the snow
and then settled again. In the sun and the warm wind the snow was falling from the
laden branches of the pines.
 “I have a massacre for thee for tomorrow morning,” Robert Jordan said. “It is
necessary to exterminate the post at the sawmill.”
 “I am ready,” Agustín said, “Estoy listo.”
 “Also the post at the roadmender’s hut below the bridge.”
 “For the one or for the other,” Agustín said. “Or for both.”
 “Not for both. They will be done at the same time,” Robert Jordan said.
 “Then for either one,” Agustín said. “Now for a long time have I wished for action in
this war. Pablo has rotted us here with inaction.”
 Anselmo came up with the ax.
 “Do you wish more branches?” he asked. “To me it seems well hidden.”
 “Not branches,” Robert Jordan said. “Two small trees that we can plant here and there
to make it look more natural. There are not enough trees here for it to be truly natural.”
 “I will bring them.”
 “Cut them well back, so the stumps cannot be seen.”
 Robert Jordan heard the ax sounding in the woods behind him. He looked up at
Primitivo above in the rocks and he looked down at the pines across the clearing. The
one crow was still there. Then he heard the first high, throbbing murmur of a plane
coming. He looked up and saw it high and tiny and silver in the sun, seeming hardly to
move in the high sky.
 “They cannot see us,” he said to Agustín. “But it is well to keep down. That is the
second observation plane today.”
 “And those of yesterday?” Agustín asked.
 “They are like a bad dream now,” Robert Jordan said.
 “They must be at Segovia. The bad dream waits there to become a reality.”
 The plane was out of sight now over the mountains but the sound of its motors still
persisted.
 As Robert Jordan looked, he saw the crow fly up. He flew straight away through the
trees without cawing.
23
 “Get thee down,” Robert Jordan whispered to Agustín, and he turned his head and
flicked his hand Down, Down, to Anselmo who was coming through the gap with a pine
tree, carrying it over his shoulder like a Christmas tree. He saw the old man drop his
pine tree behind a rock and then he was out of sight in the rocks and Robert Jordan was
looking ahead across the open space toward the timber. He saw nothing and heard
nothing but he could feel his heart pounding and then he heard the clack of stone on
stone and the leaping, dropping clicks of a small rock falling. He turned his head to the
right and looking up saw Primitivo’s rifle raised and lowered four times horizontally. Then
there was nothing more to see but the white stretch in front of him with the circle of
horse tracks and the timber beyond.
 “Cavalry,” he said softly to Agustín.
 Agustín looked at him and his dark, sunken cheeks widened at their base as he
grinned. Robert Jordan noticed he was sweating. He reached over and put his hand on
his shoulder. His hand was still there as they saw the four horsemen ride out of the
timber and he felt the muscles in Agustín’s back twitch under his hand.
 One horseman was ahead and three rode behind. The one ahead was following the
horse tracks. He looked down as he rode. The other three came behind him, fanned out
“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway 152
through the timber. They were all watching carefully. Robert Jordan felt his heart beating
against the snowy ground as he lay, his elbows spread wide and watched them over the
sights of the automatic rifle.
 The man who was leading rode along the trail to where Pablo had circled and
stopped. The others rode up to him and they all stopped.
 Robert Jordan saw them clearly over the blued steel barrel of the automatic rifle. He
saw the faces of the men, the sabers hanging, the sweat-darkened flanks of the horses,
and the cone-like slope of the khaki capes, and the Navarrese slant of the khaki berets.
The leader turned his horse directly toward the opening in the rocks where the gun was
placed and Robert Jordan saw his young, sunand wind-darkened face, his close-set
eyes, hawk nose and the overlong wedge-shaped chin.
 Sitting his horse there, the horse’s chest toward Robert Jordan, the horse’s head high,
the butt of the light automatic rifle projecting forward from the scabbard at the right of the
saddle, the leader pointed toward the opening where the gun was.
 Robert Jordan sunk his elbows into the ground and looked along the barrel at the four
riders stopped there in the snow. Three of them had their automatic rifles out. Two
carried them across the pommels of their saddles. The other sat his horse with the rifle
swung out to the right, the butt resting against his hip.
 You hardly ever see them at such range, he thought. Not along the barrel of one of
these do you see them like this. Usually the rear sight is raised and they seem
miniatures of men and you have hell to make it carry up there; or they come running,
flopping, running, and you beat a slope with fire or bar a certain street, or keep it on the
windows; or far away you see them marching on a road. Only at the trains do you see
them like this. Only then are they like now, and with four of these you can make them
scatter. Over the gun sights, at this range, it makes them twice the size of men.
 Thou, he thought, looking at the wedge of the front sight placed now firm in the slot of
the rear sight, the top of the wedge against the center of the leader’s chest, a little to the
right of the scarlet device that showed bright in the morning sun against the khaki cape.
Though, he thought, thinking in Spanish now and pressing his fingers forward against
the trigger guard to keep it away from where it would bring the quick, shocking, hurtling
rush from the automatic rifle. Thou, he thought again, thou art dead now in thy youth.
And thou, he thought, and thou, and thou. But let it not happen. Do not let it happen.
 He felt Agustín beside him start to cough, felt him hold it, choke and swallow. Then as
he looked along the oiled blue of the barrel out through the opening between the
branches, his finger still pressed forward against the trigger guard, he saw the leader
turn his horse and point into the timber where Pablo’s trail led. The four of them trotted
into the timber and Agustín said softly, “Cabrones!”
 Robert Jordan looked behind him at the rocks where Anselmo had dropped the tree.
 The gypsy, Rafael, was coming toward them through the rocks, carrying a pair of cloth
saddlebags, his rifle slung on his back. Robert Jordan waved him down and the gypsy
ducked out of sight.
 “We could have killed all four,” Agustín said quietly. He was still wet with sweat.
 “Yes,” Robert Jordan whispered. “But with the firing who knows what might have
come?”
 Just then he heard the noise of another rock falling and he looked around quickly. But
both the gypsy and Anselmo were out of sight. He looked at his wrist watch and then up
to where Primitivo was raising and lowering his rifle in what seemed an infinity of short
jerks. Pablo has forty-five minutes’ start, Robert Jordan thought, and then he heard the
noise of a body of cavalry coming.
 “No te apures,” he whispered to Agustín. “Do not worry. They will pass as the others.”
 They came into sight trotting along the edge of the timber in column of twos, twenty
mounted men, armed and uniformed as the others had been, their sabers swinging,
their carbines in their holsters; and then they went down into the timber as the others
had.
 “Tu ves?” Robert Jordan said to Agustín. “Thou seest?”
“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway 153
 “There were many,” Agustín said.
 “These would we have had to deal with if we had destroyed the others,” Robert Jordan
said very softly. His heart had quieted now and his shirt felt wet on his chest from the
melting snow. There was a hollow feeling in his chest.
 The sun was bright on the snow and it was melting fast. He could see it hollowing
away from the tree trunks and just ahead of the gun, before his eyes, the snow surface
was damp and lacily fragile as the heat of the sun melted the top and the warmth of the
earth breathed warmly up at the snow that lay upon it.
 Robert Jordan looked up at Primitivo’s post and saw him signal, “Nothing,” crossing
his two hands, palms down.
 Anselmo’s head showed above a rock and Robert Jordan motioned him up. The old
man slipped from rock to rock until he crept up and lay down flat beside the gun.
 “Many,” he said. “Many!”
 “I do not need the trees,” Robert Jordan said to him. “There is no need for further
forestal improvement.”
 Both Anselmo and Agustín grinned.
 “This has stood scrutiny well and it would be dangerous to plant trees now because
those people will return and perhaps they are not stupid.”
 He felt the need to talk that, with him, was the sign that there had just been much
danger. He could always tell how bad it had been by the strength of the desire to talk
that came after.
 “It was a good blind, eh?” he said.
 “Good,” said Agustín. “To obscenity with all fascism good. We could have killed the
four of them. Didst thou see?” he said to Anselmo.
 “I saw.”
 “Thou,” Robert Jordan said to Anselmo. “Thou must go to the post of yesterday or
another good post of thy selection to watch the road and report on all movement as of
yesterday. Already we are late in that. Stay until dark. Then come in and we will send
another.”
 “But the tracks that I will make?”
 “Go from below as soon as the snow is gone. The road will be muddied by the snow.
Note if there has been much traffic of trucks or if there are tank tracks in the softness on
the road. That is all we can tell until you are there to observe.”
 “With your permission?” the old man asked.
 “Surely.”
 “With your permission, would it not be better for me to go into La Granja and inquire
there what passed last night and arrange for one to observe today thus in the manner
you have taught me? Such a one could report tonight or, better, I could go again to La
Granja for the report.”
 “Have you no fear of encountering cavalry?”
 “Not when the snow is gone.”
 “Is there some one in La Granja capable of this?”
 “Yes. Of this, yes. It would be a woman. There are various women of trust in La
Granja.”
 “I believe it,” Agustín said. “More, I know it, and several who serve for other purposes.
You do not wish me to go?”
 “Let the old man go. You understand this gun and the day is not over.”
 “I will go when the snow melts,” Anselmo said. “And the snow is melting fast.”
 “What think you of their chance of catching Pablo?” Robert Jordan asked Agustín.
 “Pablo is smart,” Agustín said. “Do men catch a wise stag without hounds?”
 “Sometimes,” Robert Jordan said.
 “Not Pablo,” Agustín said. “Clearly, he is only a garbage of what he once was. But it is
not for nothing that he is alive and comfortable in these hills and able to drink himself to
death while there are so many others that have died against a wall.”
 “Is he as smart as they say?”
“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway 154
 “He is much smarter.”
 “He has not seemed of great ability here.”
 “Cómo qüe no? If he were not of great ability he would have died last night. It seems
to me you do not understand politics, Inglés, nor guerilla warfare. In politics and this
other the first thing is to continue to exist. Look how he continued to exist last night. And
the quantity of dung he ate both from me and from thee.”
 Now that Pablo was back in the movements of the unit, Robert Jordan did not wish to
talk against him and as soon as he had uttered it he regretted saying the thing about his
ability. He knew himself how smart Pablo was. It was Pablo who had seen instantly all
that was wrong with the orders for the destruction of the bridge. He had made the
remark only from dislike and he knew as he made it that it was wrong. It was part of the
talking too much after a strain. So now he dropped the matter and said to Anselmo,
“And to go into La Granja in daylight?”
 “It is not bad,” the old man said. “I will not go with a military band.”
 “Nor with a bell around his neck,” Agustín said. “Nor carrying a banner.”
 “How will you go?”
 “Above and down through the forest.”
 “But if they pick you up.”
 “I have papers.”
 “So have we all but thou must eat the wrong ones quickly.”
 Anselmo shook his head and tapped the breast pocket of his smock.
 “How many times have I contemplated that,” he said. “And never did I like to swallow
paper.”
 “I have thought we should carry a little mustard on them all,” Robert Jordan said. “In
my left breast pocket I carry our papers. In my right the fascist papers. Thus one does
not make a mistake in an emergency.”
 It must have been bad enough when the leader of the first patrol of cavalry had
pointed toward the entry because they were all talking very much. Too much, Robert
Jordan thought.
 “But look, Roberto,” Agustín said. “They say the government moves further to the right
each day. That in the Republic they no longer say Comrade but Señor and Señora.
Canst shift thy pockets?”
 “When it moves far enough to the right I will carry them in my hip pocket,” Robert
Jordan said, “and sew it in the center.”
 “That they should stay in thy shirt,” Agustín said. “Are we to win this war and lose the
revolution?”
 “Nay,” Robert Jordan said. “But if we do not win this war there will be no revolution nor
any Republic nor any thou nor any me nor anything but the most grand carajo.”
 “So say I,” Anselmo said. “That we should win the war.”
 “And afterwards shoot the anarchists and the Communists and all this canalla except
the good Republicans,” Agustín said.
 “That we should win this war and shoot nobody,” Anselmo said. “That we should
govern justly and that all should participate in the benefits according as they have
striven for them. And that those who have fought against us should be educated to see
their error.”
 “We will have to shoot many,” Agustín said. “Many, many, many.”
 He thumped his closed right fist against the palm of his left hand.
 “That we should shoot none. Not even the leaders. That they should be reformed by
work.”
 “I know the work I’d put them at,” Agustín said, and he picked up some snow and put it
in his mouth.
 “What, bad one?” Robert Jordan asked.
 “Two trades of the utmost brilliance.”
 “They are?”
 Agustín put some more snow in his mouth and looked across the clearing where the
“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway 155
cavalry had ridden. Then he spat the melted snow out. “Vaya. What a breakfast,” he
said. “Where is the filthy gypsy?”
 “What trades?” Robert Jordan asked him. “Speak, bad mouth.”
 “Jumping from planes without parachutes,” Agustín said, and his eyes shone. “That for
those that we care for. And being nailed to the tops of fence posts to be pushed over
backwards for the others.”
 “That way of speaking is ignoble,” Anselmo said. “Thus we will never have a
Republic.”
 “I would like to swim ten leagues in a strong soup made from the cojones of all of
them,” Agustín said. “And when I saw those four there and thought that we might kill
them I was like a mare in the corral waiting for the stallion.”
 “You know why we did not kill them, though?” Robert Jordan said quietly.
 “Yes,” Agustín said. “Yes. But the necessity was on me as it is on a mare in heat. You
cannot know what it is if you have not felt it.”
 “You sweated enough,” Robert Jordan said. “I thought it was fear.”
 “Fear, yes,” Agustín said. “Fear and the other. And in this life there is no stronger thing
than the other.”
 Yes, Robert Jordan thought. We do it coldly but they do not, nor ever have. It is their
extra sacrament. Their old one that they had before the new religion came from the far
end of the Mediterranean, the one they have never abandoned but only suppressed and
hidden to bring it out again in wars and inquisitions. They are the people of the Auto de
Fe; the act of faith. Killing is something one must do, but ours are different from theirs.
And you, he thought, you have never been corrupted by it? You never had it in the
Sierra? Nor at Usera? Nor through all the time in Estremadura? Nor at any time? Qué
va, he told himself. At every train.
 Stop making dubious literature about the Berbers and the old Iberians and admit that
you have liked to kill as all who are soldiers by choice have enjoyed it at some time
whether they lie about it or not. Anselmo does not like to because he is a hunter, not a
soldier. Don’t idealize him, either. Hunters kill animals and soldiers kill men. Don’t lie to
yourself, he thought. Nor make up literature about it. You have been tainted with it for a
long time now. And do not think against Anselmo either. He is a Christian. Something
very rare in Catholic countries.
 But with Agustín I had thought it was fear, he thought. That natural fear before action.
So it was the other, too. Of course, he may be bragging now. There was plenty of fear. I
felt the fear under my hand. Well, it was time to stop talking.
 “See if the gypsy brought food,” he said to Anselmo. “Do not let him come up. He is a
fool. Bring it yourself. And however much he brought, send back for more. I am hungry.”
24
 Now the morning was late May, the sky was high and clear and the wind blew warm
on Robert Jordan’s shoulders. The snow was going fast and they were eating breakfast.
There were two big sandwiches of meat and the goaty cheese apiece, and Robert
Jordan had cut thick slices of onion with his clasp knife and put them on each side of the
meat and cheese between the chunks of bread.
 “You will have a breath that will carry through the forest to the fascists,” Agustín said,
his own mouth full.
 “Give me the wineskin and I will rinse the mouth,” Robert Jordan said, his mouth full of
meat, cheese, onion and chewed bread.
 He had never been hungrier and he filled his mouth with wine, faintly tarry-tasting from
the leather bag, and swallowed. Then he took another big mouthful of wine, lifting the
bag up to let the jet of wine spurt into the back of his mouth, the wineskin touching the
needles of the blind of pine branches that covered the automatic rifle as he lifted his
hand, his head leaning against the pine branches as he bent it back to let the wine run
down.
“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway 156
 “Dost thou want this other sandwich?” Agustín asked him, handing it toward him
across the gun.
 “No. Thank you. Eat it.”
 “I cannot. I am not accustomed to eat in the morning.”
 “You do not want it, truly?”
 “Nay. Take it.”
 Robert Jordan took it and laid it on his lap while he got the onion out of his side jacket
pocket where the grenades were and opened his knife to slice it. He cut off a thin sliver
of the surface that had dirtied in his pocket, then cut a thick slice. An outer segment fell
and he picked it up and bent the circle together and put it into the sandwich.
 “Eatest thou always onions for breakfast?” Agustín asked.
 “When there are any.”
 “Do all in thy country do this?”
 “Nay,” Robert Jordan said. “It is looked on badly there.”
 “I am glad,” Agustín said. “I had always considered America a civilized country.”
 “What hast thou against the onion?”
 “The odor. Nothing more. Otherwise it is like the rose.”
 Robert Jordan grinned at him with his mouth full.
 “Like the rose,” he said. “Mighty like the rose. A rose is a rose is an onion.”
 “Thy onions are affecting thy brain,” Agustín said. “Take care.”
 “An onion is an onion is an onion,” Robert Jordan said cheerily and, he thought, a
stone is a stein is a rock is a boulder is a pebble.
 “Rinse thy mouth with wine,” Agustín said. “Thou art very rare, Inglés. There is great
difference between thee and the last dynamiter who worked with us.”
 “There is one great difference.”
 “Tell it to me.”
 “I am alive and he is dead,” Robert Jordan said. Then: what’s the matter with you? he
thought. Is that the way to talk? Does food make you that slap happy? What are you,
drunk on onions? Is that all it means to you, now? It never meant much, he told himself
truly. You tried to make it mean something, but it never did. There is no need to lie in the
time that is left.
 “No,” he said, seriously now. “That one was a man who had suffered greatly.”
 “And thou? Hast thou not suffered?”
 “No,” said Robert Jordan. “I am of those who suffer little.”
 “Me also,” Agustín told him. “There are those who suffer and those who do not. I suffer
very little.”
 “Less bad,” Robert Jordan tipped up the wineskin again. “And with this, less.”
 “I suffer for others.”
 “As all good men should.”
 “But for myself very little.”
 “Hast thou a wife?”
 “No.”
 “Me neither.”
 “But now you have the Maria.”
 “Yes.”
 “There is a rare thing,” Agustín said. “Since she came to us at the train the Pilar has
kept her away from all as fiercely as though she were in a convent of Carmelites. You
cannot imagine with what fierceness she guarded her. You come, and she gives her to
thee as a present. How does that seem to thee?”
 “It was not thus.”
 “How was it, then?”
 “She has put her in my care.”
 “And thy care is to joder with her all night?”
 “With luck.”
 “What a manner to care for one.”
“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway 157
 “You do not understand that one can take good care of one thus?”
 “Yes, but such care could have been furnished by any one of us.”
 “Let us not talk of it any more,” Robert Jordan said. “I care for her seriously.”
 “Seriously?”
 “As there can be nothing more serious in this world.”
 “And afterwards? After this of the bridge?”
 “She goes with me.”
 “Then,” Agustín said. “That no one speaks of it further and that the two of you go with
all luck.”
 He lifted the leather wine bag and took a long pull, then handed it to Robert Jordan.
 “One thing more, Inglés,” he said.
 “Of course.”
 “I have cared much for her, too.”
 Robert Jordan put his hand on his shoulder.
 “Much,” Agustín said. “Much. More than one is able to imagine.”
 “I can imagine.”
 “She has made an impression on me that does not dissipate.”
 “I can imagine.”
 “Look. I say this to thee in all seriousness.”
 “Say it.”
 “I have never touched her nor had anything to do with her but I care for her greatly.
Inglés, do not treat her lightly. Because she sleeps with thee she is no whore.”
 “I will care for her.”
 “I believe thee. But more. You do not understand how such a girl would be if there had
been no revolution. You have much responsibility. This one, truly, has suffered much.
She is not as we are.”
 “I will marry her.”
 “Nay. Not that. There is no need for that under the revolution. But—” he nodded his
head—”it would be better.”
 “I will marry her,” Robert Jordan said and could feel his throat swelling as he said it. “I
care for her greatly.”
 “Later,” Agustín said. “When it is convenient. The important thing is to have the
intention.”
 “I have it.”
 “Listen,” Agustín said. “I am speaking too much of a matter in which I have no right to
intervene, but hast thou known many girls of this country?”
 “A few.”
 “Whores?”
 “Some who were not.”
 “How many?”
 “Several.”
 “And did you sleep with them?”
 “No.”
 “You see?”
 “Yes.”
 “What I mean is that this Maria does not do this lightly.”
 “Nor I.”
 “If I thought you did I would have shot you last night as you lay with her. For this we kill
much here.”
 “Listen, old one,” Robert Jordan said. “It is because of the lack of time that there has
been informality. What we do not have is time. Tomorrow we must fight. To me that is
nothing. But for the Maria and me it means that we must live all of our life in this time.”
 “And a day and a night is little time,” Agustín said.
 “Yes. But there has been yesterday and the night before and last night.”
 “Look,” Agustín said. “If I can aid thee.”
“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway 158
 “No. We are all right.”
 “If I could do anything for thee or for the cropped head—”
 “No.”
 “Truly, there is little one man can do for another.”
 “No. There is much.”
 “What?”
 “No matter what passes today and tomorrow in respect to combat, give me thy
confidence and obey even though the orders may appear wrong.”
 “You have my confidence. Since this of the cavalry and the sending away of the
horse.”
 “That was nothing. You see that we are working for one thing. To win the war. Unless
we win, all other things are futile. Tomorrow we have a thing of great importance. Of true
importance. Also we will have combat. In combat there must be discipline. For many
things are not as they appear. Discipline must come from trust and confidence.”
 Agustín spat on the ground.
 “The Maria and all such things are apart,” he said. “That you and the Maria should
make use of what time there is as two human beings. If I can aid thee I am at thy orders.
But for the thing of tomorrow I will obey thee blindly. If it is necessary that one should die
for the thing of tomorrow one goes gladly and with the heart light.”
 “Thus do I feel,” Robert Jordan said. “But to hear it from thee brings pleasure.”
 “And more,” Agustín said. “That one above,” he pointed toward Primitivo, “is a
dependable value. The Pilar is much, much more than thou canst imagine. The old man
Anselmo, also. Andrés also. Eladio also. Very quiet, but a dependable element. And
Fernando. I do not know how thou hast appreciated him. It is true he is heavier than
mercury. He is fuller of boredom than a steer drawing a cart on the highroad. But to fight
and to do as he is told. Es muy hombre! Thou wilt see.”
 “We are lucky.”
 “No. We have two weak elements. The gypsy and Pablo. But the band of Sordo are as
much better than we are as we are better than goat manure.”
 “All is well then.”
 “Yes,” Agustín said. “But I wish it was for today.”
 “Me, too. To finish with it. But it is not.”
 “Do you think it will be bad?”
 “It can be.”
 “But thou are very cheerful now, Inglés.”
 “Yes.”
 “Me also. In spite of this of the Maria and all.”
 “Do you know why?”
 “No.”
 “Me neither. Perhaps it is the day. The day is good.”
 “Who knows? Perhaps it is that we will have action.”
 “I think it is that,” Robert Jordan said. “But not today. Of all things; of all importance we
must avoid it today.”
 As he spoke he heard something. It was a noise far off that came above the sound of
the warm wind in the trees. He could not be sure and he held his mouth open and
listened, glancing up at Primitivo as he did so. He thought he heard it but then it was
gone. The wind was blowing in the pines and now Robert Jordan strained all of himself
to listen. Then he heard it faintly coming down the wind.
 “It is nothing tragic with me,” he heard Agustín say. “That I should never have the
Maria is nothing. I will go with the whores as always.”
 “Shut up,” he said, not listening, and lying beside him, his head having been turned
away. Agustín looked over at him suddenly.
 “Qué pasa?” he asked.
 Robert Jordan put his hand over his own mouth and went on listening. There it came
again. It came faint, muted, dry and far away. But there was no mistaking it now. It was
“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway 159
the precise, crackling, curling roll of automatic rifle fire. It sounded as though pack after
pack of miniature firecrackers were going off at a distance that was almost out of
hearing.
 Robert Jordan looked up at Primitivo who had his head up now, his face looking
toward them, his hand cupped to his ear. As he looked Primitivo pointed up the
mountain toward the highest country.
 “They are fighting at El Sordo’s,” Robert Jordan said.
 “Then let us go to aid them,” Agustín said. “Collect the people. Vamonos.”
 “No,” Robert Jordan said. “We stay here.”
25
 Robert Jordan looked up at where Primitivo stood now in his lookout post, holding his
rifle and pointing. He nodded his head but the man kept pointing, putting his hand to his
ear and then pointing insistently and as though he could not possibly have been
understood.
 “Do you stay with this gun and unless it is sure, sure, sure that they are coming in do
not fire. And then not until they reach that shrub,” Robert Jordan pointed. “Do you
understand?”
 “Yes. But—”
 “No but. I will explain to thee later. I go to Primitivo.”
 Anselmo was by him and he said to the old man:
 “Viejo, stay there with Agustín with the gun.” He spoke slowly and unhurriedly. “He
must not fire unless cavalry is actually entering. If they merely present themselves he
must let them alone as we did before. If he must fire, hold the legs of the tripod firm for
him and hand him the pans when they are empty.”
 “Good,” the old man said. “And La Granja?”
 “Later.”
 Robert Jordan climbed up, over and around the gray boulders that were wet now
under his hands as he pulled himself up. The sun was melting the snow on them fast.
The tops of the boulders were drying and as he climbed he looked across the country
and saw the pine woods and the long open glade and the dip of the country before the
high mountains beyond. Then he stood beside Primitivo in a hollow behind two boulders
and the short, brownfaced man said to him, “They are attacking Sordo. What is it that
we do?”
 “Nothing,” Robert Jordan said.
 He heard the firing clearly here and as he looked across the country, he saw, far off,
across the distant valley where the country rose steeply again, a troop of cavalry ride
out of the timber and cross the snowy slope riding uphill in the direction of the firing. He
saw the oblong double line of men and horses dark against the snow as they forced at
an angle up the hill. He watched the double line top the ridge and go into the farther
timber.
 “We have to aid them,” Primitivo said. His voice was dry and flat.
 “It is impossible,” Robert Jordan told him. “I have expected this all morning.”
 “How?”
 “They went to steal horses last night. The snow stopped and they tracked them up
there.”
 “But we have to aid them,” Primitivo said. “We cannot leave them alone to this. Those
are our comrades.”
 Robert Jordan put his hand on the other man’s shoulder.
 “We can do nothing,” he said. “If we could I would do it.”
 “There is a way to reach there from above. We can take that way with the horses and
the two guns. This one below and thine. We can aid them thus.”
 “Listen—” Robert Jordan said.
 “That is what I listen to,” Primitivo said.
“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway 160
 The firing was rolling in overlapping waves. Then they heard the noise of hand
grenades heavy and sodden in the dry rolling of the automatic rifle fire.
 “They are lost,” Robert Jordan said. “They were lost when the snow stopped. If we go
there we are lost, too. It is impossible to divide what force we have.”
 There was a gray stubble of beard stippled over Primitivo’s jaws, his lip and his neck.
The rest of his face was flat brown with a broken, flattened nose and deep-set gray
eyes, and watching him Robert Jordan saw the stubble twitching at the corners of his
mouth and over the cord of his throat.
 “Listen to it,” he said. “It is a massacre.”
 “If they have surrounded the hollow it is that,” Robert Jordan said. “Some may have
gotten out.”
 “Coming on them now we could take them from behind,” Primitivo said. “Let four of us
go with the horses.”
 “And then what? What happens after you take them from behind?”
 “We join with Sordo.”
 “To die there? Look at the sun. The day is long.”
 The sky was high and cloudless and the sun was hot on their backs. There were big
bare patches now on the southern slope of the open glade below them and the snow
was all dropped from the pine trees. The boulders below them that had been wet as the
snow melted were steaming faintly now in the hot sun.
 “You have to stand it,” Robert Jordan said. “Hay que aguantarse. There are things like
this in a war.”
 “But there is nothing we can do? Truly?” Primitivo looked at him and Robert Jordan
knew he trusted him. “Thou couldst not send me and another with the small machine
gun?”
 “It would be useless,” Robert Jordan said.
 He thought he saw something that he was looking for but it was a hawk that slid down
into the wind and then rose above the line of the farthest pine woods. “It would be
useless if we all went,” he said.
 Just then the firing doubled in intensity and in it was the heavy bumping of the hand
grenades.
 “Oh, obscenity them,” Primitivo said with an absolute devoutness of blasphemy, tears
in his eyes and his cheeks twitching. “Oh, God and the Virgin, obscenity them in the milk
of their filth.”
 “Calm thyself,” Robert Jordan said. “You will be fighting them soon enough. Here
comes the woman.”
 Pilar was climbing up to them, making heavy going of it in the boulders.
 Primitivo kept saying. “Obscenity them. Oh, God and the Virgin, befoul them,” each
time for firing rolled down the wind, and Robert Jordan climbed down to help Pilar up.
 “Qué tal, woman,” he said, taking hold of both her wrists and hoisting as she climbed
heavily over the last boulder.
 “Thy binoculars,” she said and lifted their strap over her head. “So it has come to
Sordo?”
 “Yes.”
 “Pobre,” she said in commiseration. “Poor Sordo.”
 She was breathing heavily from the climb and she took hold of Robert Jordan’s hand
and gripped it tight in hers as she looked out over the country.
 “How does the combat seem?”
 “Bad. Very bad.”
 “He’s jodido?”
 “I believe so.”
 “Pobre,” she said. “Doubtless because of the horses?”
 “Probably.”
 “Pobre,” Pilar said. Then, “Rafael recounted me all of an entire novel of dung about
cavalry. What came?”
“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway 161
 “A patrol and part of a squadron.”
 “Up to what point?”
 Robert Jordan pointed out where the patrol had stopped and showed her where the
gun was hidden. From where they stood they could just see one of Agustín’s boots
protruding from the rear of the blind.
 “The gypsy said they rode to where the gun muzzle pressed against the chest of the
horse of the leader,” Pilar said. “What a race! Thy glasses were in the cave.”
 “Have you packed?”
 “All that can be taken. Is there news of Pablo?”
 “He was forty minutes ahead of the cavalry. They took his trail.”
 Pilar grinned at him. She still held his hand. Now she dropped it. “They’ll never see
him,” she said. “Now for Sordo. Can we do anything?”
 “Nothing.”
 “Pobre,” she said. “I was fond of Sordo. Thou art sure, sure that he is jodido?”
 “Yes. I have seen much cavalry.”
 “More than were here?”
 “Another full troop on their way up there.”
 “Listen to it,” Pilar said. “Pobre, pobre Sordo.”
 They listened to the firing.
 “Primitivo wanted to go up there,” Robert Jordan said.
 “Art thou crazy?” Pilar said to the flat-faced man. “What kind of locos are we producing
here?”
 “I wish to aid them.”
 “Qué va,” Pilar said. “Another romantic. Dost thou not believe thou wilt die quick
enough here without useless voyages?”
 Robert Jordan looked at her, at the heavy brown face with the high Indian
cheekbones, the wide-set dark eyes and the laughing mouth with the heavy, bitter upper
lip.
 “Thou must act like a man,” she said to Primitivo. “A grown man. You with your gray
hairs and all.”
 “Don’t joke at me,” Primitivo said sullenly. “If a man has a little heart and a little
imagination—”
 “He should learn to control them,” Pilar said. “Thou wilt die soon enough with us.
There is no need to seek that with strangers. As for thy imagination. The gypsy has
enough for all. What a novel he told me.”
 “If thou hadst seen it thou wouldst not call it a novel,” Primitivo said. “There was a
moment of great gravity.”
 “Qué va,” Pilar said. “Some cavalry rode here and they rode away. And you all make
yourselves a heroism. It is to this we have come with so much inaction.”
 “And this of Sordo is not grave?” Primitivo said contemptuously now. He suffered
visibly each time the firing came down the wind and he wanted either to go to the
combat or have Pilar go and leave him alone.
 “Total, qué?” Pilar said. “It has come so it has come. Don’t lose thy cojones for the
misfortune of another.”
 “Go defile thyself,” Primitivo said. “There are women of a stupidity and brutality that is
insupportable.”
 “In order to support and aid those men poorly equipped for procreation,” Pilar said, “if
there is nothing to see I am going.”
 Just then Robert Jordan heard the plane high overhead. He looked up and in the high
sky it looked to be the same observation plane that he had seen earlier in the morning.
Now it was returning from the direction of the lines and it was moving in the direction of
the high country where El Sordo was being attacked.
 “There is the bad luck bird,” Pilar said. “Will it see what goes on there?”
 “Surely,” Robert Jordan said. “If they are not blind.”
 They watched the plane moving high and silvery and steady in the sunlight. It was
“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway 162
coming from the left and they could see the round disks of light the two propellers made.
 “Keep down,” Robert Jordan said.
 Then the plane was overhead, its shadows passing over the open glade, the throbbing
reaching its maximum of portent. Then it was past and headed toward the top of the
valley. They watched it go steadily on its course until it was just out of sight and then
they saw it coming back in a wide dipping circle, to circle twice over the high country and
then disappear in the direction of Segovia.
 Robert Jordan looked at Pilar. There was perspiration on her forehead and she shook
her head: She had been holding her lower lip between her teeth.
 “For each one there is something,” she said. “For me it is those.”
 “Thou hast not caught my fear?” Primitivo said sarcastically.
 “Nay,” she put her hand on his shoulder. “Thou hast no fear to catch. I know that. I am
sorry I joked too roughly with thee. We are all in the same caldron.” Then she spoke to
Robert Jordan. “I will send up food and wine. Dost need anything more?”
 “Not in this moment. Where are the others?”
 “Thy reserve is intact below with the horses,” she grinned. “Everything is out of sight.
Everything to go is ready. Maria is with thy material.”
 “If by any chance we should have aviation keep her in the cave.”
 “Yes, my Lord Inglés,” Pilar said. “Thy gypsy (I give him to thee) I have sent to gather
mushrooms to cook with the hares. There are many mushrooms now and it seemed to
me we might as well eat the hares although they would be better tomorrow or the day
after.”
 “I think it is best to eat them,” Robert Jordan said, and Pilar put her big hand on his
shoulder where the strap of the submachine gun crossed his chest, then reached up
and mussed his hair with her fingers. “What an Inglés,” Pilar said. “I will send the Maria
with the puchero when they are cooked.”
 The firing from far away and above had almost died out and now there was only an
occasional shot.
 “You think it is over?” Pilar asked.
 “No,” Robert Jordan said. “From the sound that we have heard they have attacked and
been beaten off. Now I would say the attackers have them surrounded. They have taken
cover and they wait for the planes.”
 Pilar spoke to Primitivo, “Thou. Dost understand there was no intent to insult thee?”
 “Ya lo sé,” said Primitivo. “I have put up with worse than that from thee. Thou hast a
vile tongue. But watch thy mouth, woman. Sordo was a good comrade of mine.”
 “And not of mine?” Pilar asked him. “Listen, flat face. In war one cannot say what one
feels. We have enough of our own without taking Sordo’s.”
 Primitivo was still sullen.
 “You should take a physic,” Pilar told him. “Now I go to prepare the meal.”
 “Did you bring the documentation of the requeté?” Robert Jordan asked her.
 “How stupid I am,” she said. “I forgot it. I will send the Maria.”
26
 It was three o’clock in the afternoon before the planes came. The snow had all been
gone by noon and the rocks were hot now in the sun. There were no clouds in the sky
and Robert Jordan sat in the rocks with his shirt off browning his back in the sun and
reading the letters that had been in the pockets of the dead cavalryman. From time to
time he would stop reading to look across the open slope to the line of the timber, look
over the high country above and then return to the letters. No more cavalry had
appeared. At intervals there would be the sound of a shot from the direction of El
Sordo’s camp. But the firing was desultory.
 From examining his military papers he knew the boy was from Tafalla in Navarra,
twenty-one years old, unmarried, and the son of a blacksmith. His regiment was the Nth
cavalry, which surprised Robert Jordan, for he had believed that regiment to be in the
“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway 163
North. He was a Carlist, and he had been wounded at the fighting for Irun at the start of
the war.
 I’ve probably seen him run through the streets ahead of the bulls at the feria in
Pamplona, Robert Jordan thought. You never kill any one that you want to kill in a war,
he said to himself. Well, hardly ever, he amended and went on reading the letters.
 The first letters he read were very formal, very carefully written and dealt almost
entirely with local happenings. They were from his sister and Robert Jordan learned that
everything was all right in Tafalla, that father was well, that mother was the same as
always but with certain complaints about her back, that she hoped he was well and not
in too great danger and she was happy he was doing away with the Reds to liberate
Spain from the domination of the Marxist hordes. Then there was a list of those boys
from Tafalla who had been killed or badly wounded since she wrote last. She mentioned
ten who were killed. That is a great many for a town the size of Tafalla, Robert Jordan
thought.
 There was quite a lot of religion in the letter and she prayed to Saint Anthony, to the
Blessed Virgin of Pilar, and to other Virgins to protect him and she wanted him never to
forget that he was also protected by the Sacred Heart of Jesus that he wore still, she
trusted, at all times over his own heart where it had been proven innumerable—this was
underlined—times to have the power of stopping bullets. She was as always his loving
sister Concha.
 This letter was a little stained around the edges and Robert Jordan put it carefully
back with the military papers and opened a letter with a less severe handwriting. It was
from the boy’s novia, his fiancée, and it was quietly, formally, and completely hysterical
with concern for his safety. Robert Jordan read it through and then put all the letters
together with the papers into his hip pocket. He did not want to read the other letters.
 I guess I’ve done my good deed for today, he said to himself. I guess you have all
right, he repeated.
 “What are those you were reading?” Primitivo asked him.
 “The documentation and the letters of that requeté we shot this morning. Do you want
to see it?”
 “I can’t read,” Primitivo said. “Was there anything interesting?”
 “No,” Robert Jordan told him. “They are personal letters.”
 “How are things going where he came from? Can you tell from the letters?”
 “They seem to be going all right,” Robert Jordan said. “There are many losses in his
town.” He looked down to where the blind for the automatic rifle had been changed a
little and improved after the snow melted. It looked convincing enough. He looked off
across the country.
 “From what town is he?” Primitivo asked.
 “Tafalla,” Robert Jordan told him.
 All right, he said to himself. I’m sorry, if that does any good.
 It doesn’t, he said to himself.
 All right then, drop it, he said to himself.
 All right, it’s dropped.
 But it would not drop that easily. How many is that you have killed? he asked himself. I
don’t know. Do you think you have a right to kill any one? No. But I have to. How many
of those you have killed have been real fascists? Very few. But they are all the enemy to
whose force we are opposing force. But you like the people of Navarra better than those
of any other part of Spain. Yes. And you kill them. Yes. If you don’t believe it go down
there to the camp. Don’t you know it is wrong to kill? Yes. But you do it? Yes. And you
still believe absolutely that your cause is right? Yes.
 It is right, he told himself, not reassuringly, but proudly. I believe in the people and
their right to govern themselves as they wish. But you mustn’t believe in killing, he told
himself. You must do it as a necessity but you must not believe in it. If you believe in it
the whole thing is wrong.
 But how many do you suppose you have killed? I don’t know because I won’t keep
“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway 164
track. But do you know? Yes. How many? You can’t be sure how many. Blowing the
trains you kill many. Very many. But you can’t be sure. But of those you are sure of?
More than twenty. And of those how many were real fascists? Two that I am sure of.
Because I had to shoot them when we took them prisoners at Usera. And you did not
mind that? No. Nor did you like it? No. I decided never to do it again. I have avoided it. I
have avoided killing those who are unarmed.
 Listen, he told himself. You better cut this out. This is very bad for you and for your
work. Then himself said back to him, You listen, see? Because you are doing something
very serious and I have to see you understand it all the time. I have to keep you straight
in your head. Because if you are not absolutely straight in your head you have no right
to do the things you do for all of them are crimes and no man has a right to take another
man’s life unless it is to prevent something worse happening to other people. So get it
straight and do not lie to yourself.
 But I won’t keep a count of people I have killed as though it were a trophy record or a
disgusting business like notches in a gun, he told himself. I have a right to not keep
count and I have a right to forget them.
 No, himself said. You have no right to forget anything. You have no right to shut your
eyes to any of it nor any right to forget any of it nor to soften it nor to change it.
 Shut up, he told himself. You’re getting awfully pompous.
 Nor ever to deceive yourself about it, himself went on.
 All right, he told himself. Thanks for all the good advice and is it all right for me to love
Maria?
 Yes, himself said.
 Even if there isn’t supposed to be any such thing as love in a purely materialistic
conception of society?
 Since when did you ever have any such conception? himself asked. Never. And you
never could have. You’re not a real Marxist and you know it. You believe in Liberty,
Equality and Fraternity. You believe in Life, Liberty and the Pursuit of Happiness. Don’t
ever kid yourself with too much dialectics. They are for some but not for you. You have
to know them in order not to be a sucker. You have put many things in abeyance to win
a war. If this war is lost all of those things are lost.
 But afterwards you can discard what you do not believe in. There is plenty you do not
believe in and plenty that you do believe in.
 And another thing. Don’t ever kid yourself about loving some one. It is just that most
people are not lucky enough ever to have it. You never had it before and now you have
it. What you have with Maria, whether it lasts just through today and a part of tomorrow,
or whether it lasts for a long life is the most important thing that can happen to a human
being. There will always be people who say it does not exist because they cannot have
it. But I tell you it is true and that you have it and that you are lucky even if you die
tomorrow.
 Cut out the dying stuff, he said to himself. That’s not the way we talk. That’s the way
our friends the anarchists talk. Whenever things get really bad they want to set fire to
something and to die. It’s a very odd kind of mind they have. Very odd. Well, we’re
getting through today, old timer, he told himself. It’s nearly three o’clock now and there
is going to be some food sooner or later. They are still shooting up at Sordo’s, which
means that they have him surrounded and are waiting to bring up more people,
probably. Though they have to make it before dark.
 I wonder what it is like up at Sordo’s. That’s what we all have to expect, given enough
time. I imagine it is not too jovial up at Sordo’s. We certainly got Sordo into a fine jam
with that horse business. How does it go in Spanish? Un callejón sin salida. A
passageway with no exit. I suppose I could go through with it all right. You only have to
do it once and it is soon over with. But wouldn’t it be luxury to fight in a war some time
where, when you were surrounded, you could surrender? Estamos copados. We are
surrounded. That was the great panic cry of this war. Then the next thing was that you
were shot; with nothing bad before if you were lucky. Sordo wouldn’t be lucky that way.
“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway 165
Neither would they when the time ever came.
 It was three o’clock. Then he heard the far-off, distant throbbing and, looking up, he
saw the planes.
27
 El Sordo was making his fight on a hilltop. He did not like this hill and when he saw it
he thought it had the shape of a chancre. But he had had no choice except this hill and
he had picked it as far away as he could see it and galloped for it, the automatic rifle
heavy on his back, the horse laboring, barrel heaving between his thighs, the sack of
grenades swinging against one side, the sack of automatic rifle pans banging against
the other, and Joaquín and Ignacio halting and firing, halting and firing to give him time
to get the gun in place.
 There had still been snow then, the snow that had ruined them, and when his horse
was hit so that he wheezed in a slow, jerking, climbing stagger up the last part of the
crest, splattering the snow with a bright, pulsing jet, Sordo had hauled him along by the
bridle, the reins over his shoulder as he climbed. He climbed as hard as he could with
the bullets spatting on the rocks, with the two sacks heavy on his shoulders, and then,
holding the horse by the mane, had shot him quickly, expertly, and tenderly just where
he had needed him, so that the horse pitched, head forward down to plug a gap
between two rocks. He had gotten the gun to firing over the horse’s back and he fired
two pans, the gun clattering, the empty shells pitching into the snow, the smell of burnt
hair from the burnt hide where the hot muzzle rested, him firing at what came up to the
hill, forcing them to scatter for cover, while all the time there was a chill in his back from
not knowing what was behind him. Once the last of the five men had reached the hilltop
the chill went out of his back and he had saved the pans he had left until he would need
them.
 There were two more horses dead along the slope and three more were dead here on
the hilltop. He had only succeeded in stealing three horses last night and one had bolted
when they tried to mount him bareback in the corral at the camp when the first shooting
had started.
 Of the five men who had reached the hilltop three were wounded. Sordo was wounded
in the calf of his leg and in two places in his left arm. He was very thirsty, his wounds
had stiffened, and one of the wounds in his left arm was very painful. He also had a bad
headache and as he lay waiting for the planes to come he thought of a joke in Spanish.
It was, “Hay que tomar la muerte como si fuera aspirina,” which means, “You will have
to take death as an aspirin.” But he did not make the joke aloud. He grinned somewhere
inside the pain in his head and inside the nausea that came whenever he moved his
arm and looked around at what there was left of his band.
 The five men were spread out like the points of a five-pointed star. They had dug with
their knees and hands and made mounds in front of their heads and shoulders with the
dirt and piles of stones. Using this cover, they were linking the individual mounds up with
stones and dirt. Joaquín, who was eighteen years old, had a steel helmet that he dug
with and he passed dirt in it.
 He had gotten this helmet at the blowing up of the train. It had a bullet hole through it
and every one had always joked at him for keeping it. But he had hammered the jagged
edges of the bullet hole smooth and driven a wooden plug into it and then cut the plug
off and smoothed it even with the metal inside the helmet.
 When the shooting started he had clapped this helmet on his head so hard it banged
his head as though he had been hit with a casserole and, in the last lung-aching, legdead, mouth-dry, bulletspatting, bullet-cracking, bullet-singing run up the final slope of
the hill after his horse was killed, the helmet had seemed to weigh a great amount and
to ring his bursting forehead with an iron band. But he had kept it. Now he dug with it in
a steady, almost machinelike desperation. He had not yet been hit.
 “It serves for something finally,” Sordo said to him in his deep, throaty voice.
“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway 166
 “Resistir y fortificar es vencer,” Joaquín said, his mouth stiff with the dryness of fear
which surpassed the normal thirst of battle. It was one of the slogans of the Communist
party and it meant, “Hold out and fortify, and you will win.”
 Sordo looked away and down the slope at where a cavalryman was sniping from
behind a boulder. He was very fond of this boy and he was in no mood for slogans.
 “What did you say?”
 One of the men turned from the building that he was doing. This man was lying flat on
his face, reaching carefully up with his hands to put a rock in place while keeping his
chin flat against the ground.
 Joaquín repeated the slogan in his dried-up boy’s voice without checking his digging
for a moment.
 “What was the last word?” the man with his chin on the ground asked.
 “Vencer,” the boy said. “Win.”
 “Mierda,” the man with his chin on the ground said.
 “There is another that applies to here,” Joaquín said, bringing them out as though they
were talismans, “Pasionaria says it is better to die on your feet than to live on your
knees.”
 “Mierda again,” the man said and another man said, over his shoulder, “We’re on our
bellies, not our knees.”
 “Thou. Communist. Do you know your Pasionaria has a son thy age in Russia since
the start of the movement?”
 “It’s a lie,” Joaquín said.
 “Qué va, it’s a lie,” the other said. “The dynamiter with the rare name told me. He was
of thy party, too. Why should he lie?”
 “It’s a lie,” Joaquín said. “She would not do such a thing as keep a son hidden in
Russia out of the war.”
 “I wish I were in Russia,” another of Sordo’s men said. “Will not thy Pasionaria send
me now from here to Russia, Communist?”
 “If thou believest so much in thy Pasionaria, get her to get us off this hill,” one of the
men who had a bandaged thigh said.
 “The fascists will do that,” the man with his chin in the dirt said.
 “Do not speak thus,” Joaquín said to him.
 “Wipe the pap of your mother’s breasts off thy lips and give me a hatful of that dirt,”
the man with his chin on the ground said. “No one of us will see the sun go down this
night.”
 El Sordo was thinking: It is shaped like a chancre. Or the breast of a young girl with no
nipple. Or the top cone of a volcano. You have never seen a volcano, he thought. Nor
will you ever see one. And this hill is like a chancre. Let the volcanos alone. It’s late now
for the volcanos.
 He looked very carefully around the withers of the dead horse and there was a quick
hammering of firing from behind a boulder well down the slope and he heard the bullets
from the submachine gun thud into the horse. He crawled along behind the horse and
looked out of the angle between the horse’s hindquarters and the rock. There were
three bodies on the slope just below him where they had fallen when the fascists had
rushed the crest under cover of the automatic rifle and submachine gunfire and he and
the others had broken down the attack by throwing and rolling down hand grenades.
There were other bodies that he could not see on the other sides of the hill crest. There
was no dead ground by which attackers could approach the summit and Sordo knew
that as long as his ammunition and grenades held out and he had as many as four men
they could not get him out of there unless they brought up a trench mortar. He did not
know whether they had sent to La Granja for a trench mortar. Perhaps they had not,
because surely, soon, the planes would come. It had been four hours since the
observation plane had flown over them.
 This hill is truly like a chancre, Sordo thought, and we are the very pus of it. But we
killed many when they made that stupidness. How could they think that they would take
“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway 167
us thus? They have such modern armament that they lose all their sense with
overconfidence. He had killed the young officer who had led the assault with a grenade
that had gone bouncing and rolling down the slope as they came up it, running, bent half
over. In the yellow flash and gray roar of smoke he had seen the officer dive forward to
where he lay now like a heavy, broken bundle of old clothing marking the farthest point
that the assault had reached. Sordo looked at this body and then, down the hill, at the
others.
 They are brave but stupid people, he thought. But they have sense enough now not to
attack us again until the planes come. Unless, of course, they have a mortar coming. It
would be easy with a mortar. The mortar was the normal thing and he knew that they
would die as soon as a mortar came up, but when he thought of the planes coming up
he felt as naked on that hilltop as though all of his clothing and even his skin had been
removed. There is no nakeder thing than I feel, he thought. A flayed rabbit is as well
covered as a bear in comparison. But why should they bring planes? They could get us
out of here with a trench mortar easily. They are proud of their planes, though, and they
will probably bring them. Just as they were so proud of their automatic weapons that
they made that stupidness. But undoubtedly they must have sent for a mortar too.
 One of the men fired. Then jerked the bolt and fired again, quickly.
 “Save thy cartridges,” Sordo said.
 “One of the sons of the great whore tried to reach that boulder,” the man pointed.
 “Did you hit him?” Sordo asked, turning his head with difficulty.
 “Nay,” the man said. “The fornicator ducked back.”
 “Who is a whore of whores is Pilar,” the man with his chin in the dirt said. “That whore
knows we are dying here.”
 “She could do no good,” Sordo said. The man had spoken on the side of his good ear
and he had heard him without turning his head. “What could she do?”
 “Take these sluts from the rear.”
 “Qué va,” Sordo said. “They are spread around a hillside. How would she come on
them? There are a hundred and fifty of them. Maybe more now.”
 “But if we hold out until dark,” Joaquín said.
 “And if Christmas comes on Easter,” the man with his chin on the ground said.
 “And if thy aunt had cojones she would be thy uncle,” another said to him. “Send for
thy Pasionaria. She alone can help us.”
 “I do not believe that about the son,” Joaquín said. “Or if he is there he is training to be
an aviator or something of that sort.”
 “He is hidden there for safety,” the man told him.
 “He is studying dialectics. Thy Pasionaria has been there. So have Lister and Modesto
and others. The one with the rare name told me.”
 “That they should go to study and return to aid us,” Joaquín said.
 “That they should aid us now,” another man said. “That all the cruts of Russian
sucking swindlers should aid us now.” He fired and said, “Me cago en tal; I missed him
again.”
 “Save thy cartridges and do not talk so much or thou wilt be very thirsty,” Sordo said.
“There is no water on this hill.”
 “Take this,” the man said and rolling on his side he pulled a wineskin that he wore
slung from his shoulder over his head and handed it to Sordo. “Wash thy mouth out, old
one. Thou must have much thirst with thy wounds.”
 “Let all take it,” Sordo said.
 “Then I will have some first,” the owner said and squirted a long stream into his mouth
before he handed the leather bottle around.
 “Sordo, when thinkest thou the planes will come?” the man with his chin in the dirt
asked.
 “Any time,” said Sordo. “They should have come before.”
 “Do you think these sons of the great whore will attack again?”
 “Only if the planes do not come.”
“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway 168
 He did not think there was any need to speak about the mortar. They would know it
soon enough when the mortar came.
 “God knows they’ve enough planes with what we saw yesterday.”
 “Too many,” Sordo said.
 His head hurt very much and his arm was stiffening so that the pain of moving it was
almost unbearable. He looked up at the bright, high, blue early summer sky as he raised
the leather wine bottle with his good arm. He was fifty-two years old and he was sure
this was the last time he would see that sky.
 He was not at all afraid of dying but he was angry at being trapped on this hill which
was only utilizable as a place to die. If we could have gotten clear, he thought. If we
could have made them come up the long valley or if we could have broken loose across
the road it would have been all right. But this chancre of a hill. We must use it as well as
we can and we have used it very well so far.
 If he had known how many men in history have had to use a hill to die on it would not
have cheered him any for, in the moment he was passing through, men are not
impressed by what has happened to other men in similar circumstances any more than
a widow of one day is helped by the knowledge that other loved husbands have died.
Whether one has fear of it or not, one’s death is difficult to accept. Sordo had accepted it
but there was no sweetness in its acceptance even at fifty-two, with three wounds and
him surrounded on a hill.
 He joked about it to himself but he looked at the sky and at the far mountains and he
swallowed the wine and he did not want it. If one must die, he thought, and clearly one
must, I can die. But I hate it.
 Dying was nothing and he had no picture of it nor fear of it in his mind. But living was a
field of grain blowing in the wind on the side of a hill. Living was a hawk in the sky.
Living was an earthen jar of water in the dust of the threshing with the grain flailed out
and the chaff blowing. Living was a horse between your legs and a carbine under one
leg and a hill and a valley and a stream with trees along it and the far side of the valley
and the hills beyond.
 Sordo passed the wine bottle back and nodded his head in thanks. He leaned forward
and patted the dead horse on the shoulder where the muzzle of the automatic rifle had
burned the hide. He could still smell the burnt hair. He thought how he had held the
horse there, trembling, with the fire around them, whispering and cracking, over and
around them like a curtain, and had carefully shot him just at the intersection of the
cross-lines between the two eyes and the ears. Then as the horse pitched down he had
dropped down behind his warm, wet back to get the gun to going as they came up the
hill.
 “Eras mucho caballo,” he said, meaning, “Thou wert plenty of horse.”
 El Sordo lay now on his good side and looked up at the sky. He was lying on a heap of
empty cartridge hulls but his head was protected by the rock and his body lay in the lee
of the horse. His wounds had stiffened badly and he had much pain and he felt too tired
to move.
 “What passes with thee, old one?” the man next to him asked.
 “Nothing. I am taking a little rest.”
 “Sleep,” the other said. “They will wake us when they come.”
 Just then some one shouted from down the slope.
 “Listen, bandits!” the voice came from behind the rocks where the closest automatic
rifle was placed. “Surrender now before the planes blow you to pieces.”
 “What is it he says?” Sordo asked.
 Joaquín told him. Sordo rolled to one side and pulled himself up so that he was
crouched behind the gun again.
 “Maybe the planes aren’t coming,” he said. “Don’t answer them and do not fire. Maybe
we can get them to attack again.”
 “If we should insult them a little?” the man who had spoken to Joaquín about La
Pasionaria’s son in Russia asked.
“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway 169
 “No,” Sordo said. “Give me thy big pistol. Who has a big pistol?”
 “Here.”
 “Give it to me.” Crouched on his knees he took the big 9 mm. Star and fired one shot
into the ground beside the dead horse, waited, then fired again four times at irregular
intervals. Then he waited while he counted sixty and then fired a final shot directly into
the body of the dead horse. He grinned and handed back the pistol.
 “Reload it,” he whispered, “and that every one should keep his mouth shut and no one
shoot.”
 “Bandidos!” the voice shouted from behind the rocks.
 No one spoke on the hill.
 “Bandidos! Surrender now before we blow thee to little pieces.”
 “They’re biting,” Sordo whispered happily.
 As he watched, a man showed his head over the top of the rocks. There was no shot
from the hilltop and the head went down again. El Sordo waited, watching, but nothing
more happened. He turned his head and looked at the others who were all watching
down their sectors of the slope. As he looked at them the others shook their heads.
 “Let no one move,” he whispered.
 “Sons of the great whore,” the voice came now from behind the rocks again.
 “Red swine. Mother rapers. Eaters of the milk of thy fathers.”
 Sordo grinned. He could just hear the bellowed insults by turning his good ear. This is
better than the aspirin, he thought. How many will we get? Can they be that foolish?
 The voice had stopped again and for three minutes they heard nothing and saw no
movement. Then the sniper behind the boulder a hundred yards down the slope
exposed himself and fired. The bullet hit a rock and ricocheted with a sharp whine. Then
Sordo saw a man, bent double, run from the shelter of the rocks where the automatic
rifle was across the open ground to the big boulder behind which the sniper was hidden.
He almost dove behind the boulder.
 Sordo looked around. They signalled to him that there was no movement on the other
slopes. El Sordo grinned happily and shook his head. This is ten times better than the
aspirin, he thought, and he waited, as happy as only a hunter can be happy.
 Below on the slope the man who had run from the pile of stones to the shelter of the
boulder was speaking to the sniper.
 “Do you believe it?”
 “I don’t know,” the sniper said.
 “It would be logical,” the man, who was the officer in command, said. “They are
surrounded. They have nothing to expect but to die.”
 The sniper said nothing.
 “What do you think?” the officer asked.
 “Nothing,” the sniper said.
 “Have you seen any movement since the shots?”
 “None at all.”
 The officer looked at his wrist watch. It was ten minutes to three o’clock.
 “The planes should have come an hour ago,” he said. Just then another officer flopped
in behind the boulder. The sniper moved over to make room for him.
 “Thou, Paco,” the first officer said. “How does it seem to thee?”
 The second officer was breathing heavily from his sprint up and across the hillside
from the automatic rifle position.
 “For me it is a trick,” he said.
 “But if it is not? What a ridicule we make waiting here and laying siege to dead men.”
 “We have done something worse than ridiculous already,” the second officer said.
“Look at that slope.”
 He looked up the slope to where the dead were scattered close to the top. From
where he looked the line of the hilltop showed the scattered rocks, the belly, projecting
legs, shod hooves jutting out, of Sordo’s horse, and the fresh dirt thrown up by the
digging.
“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway 170
 “What about the mortars?” asked the second officer.
 “They should be here in an hour. If not before.”
 “Then wait for them. There has been enough stupidity already.”
 “Bandidos!” the first officer shouted suddenly, getting to his feet and putting his head
well up above the boulder so that the crest of the hill looked much closer as he stood
upright. “Red swine! Cowards!”
 The second officer looked at the sniper and shook his head. The sniper looked away
but his lips tightened.
 The first officer stood there, his head all clear of the rock and with his hand on his
pistol butt. He cursed and vilified the hilltop. Nothing happened. Then he stepped clear
of the boulder and stood there looking up the hill.
 “Fire, cowards, if you are alive,” he shouted. “Fire on one who has no fear of any Red
that ever came out of the belly of the great whore.”
 This last was quite a long sentence to shout and the officer’s face was red and
congested as he finished.
 The second officer, who was a thin sunburned man with quiet eyes, a thin, long-lipped
mouth and a stubble of beard over his hollow cheeks, shook his head again. It was this
officer who was shouting who had ordered the first assault. The young lieutenant who
was dead up the slope had been the best friend of this other lieutenant who was named
Paco Berrendo and who was listening to the shouting of the captain, who was obviously
in a state of exaltation.
 “Those are the swine who shot my sister and my mother,” the captain said. He had a
red face and a blond, British-looking moustache and there was something wrong about
his eyes. They were a light blue and the lashes were light, too. As you looked at them
they seemed to focus slowly. Then “Reds,” he shouted. “Cowards!” and commenced
cursing again.
 He stood absolutely clear now and, sighting carefully, fired his pistol at the only target
that the hilltop presented: the dead horse that had belonged to Sordo. The bullet threw
up a puff of dirt fifteen yards below the horse. The captain fired again. The bullet hit a
rock and sung off.
 The captain stood there looking at the hilltop. The Lieutenant Berrendo was looking at
the body of the other lieutenant just below the summit. The sniper was looking at the
ground under his eyes. Then he looked up at the captain.
 “There is no one alive up there,” the captain said. “Thou,” he said to the sniper, “go up
there and see.”
 The sniper looked down. He said nothing.
 “Don’t you hear me?” the captain shouted at him.
 “Yes, my captain,” the sniper said, not looking at him.
 “Then get up and go.” The captain still had his pistol out. “Do you hear me?”
 “Yes, my captain.”
 “Why don’t you go, then?”
 “I don’t want to, my captain.”
 “You don’t want to?” The captain pushed the pistol against the small of the man’s
back. “You don’t want to?”
 “I am afraid, my captain,” the soldier said with dignity.
 Lieutenant Berrendo, watching the captain’s face and his odd eyes, thought he was
going to shoot the man then.
 “Captain Mora,” he said.
 “Lieutenant Berrendo?”
 “It is possible the soldier is right.”
 “That he is right to say he is afraid? That he is right to say he does not want to obey
an order?”
 “No. That he is right that it is a trick.”
 “They are all dead,” the captain said. “Don’t you hear me say they are all dead?’
 “You mean our comrades on the slope?” Berrendo asked him. “I agree with you.”
“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway 171
 “Paco,” the captain said, “don’t be a fool. Do you think you are the only one who cared
for Julián? I tell you the Reds are dead. Look!”
 He stood up, then put both hands on top of the boulder and pulled himself up,
kneeing-up awkwardly, then getting on his feet.
 “Shoot,” he shouted, standing on the gray granite boulder and waved both his arms.
“Shoot me! Kill me!”
 On the hilltop El Sordo lay behind the dead horse and grinned.
 What a people, he thought. He laughed, trying to hold it in because the shaking hurt
his arm.
 “Reds,” came the shout from below. “Red canaille. Shoot me! Kill me!”
 Sordo, his chest shaking, barely peeped past the horse’s crupper and saw the captain
on top of the boulder waving his arms. Another officer stood by the boulder. The sniper
was standing at the other side. Sordo kept his eye where it was and shook his head
happily.
 “Shoot me,” he said softly to himself. “Kill me!” Then his shoulders shook again. The
laughing hurt his arm and each time he laughed his head felt as though it would burst.
But the laughter shook him again like a spasm.
 Captain Mora got down from the boulder.
 “Now do you believe me, Paco?” he questioned Lieutenant Berrendo.
 “No,” said Lieutenant Berrendo.
 “Cojones!” the captain said. “Here there is nothing but idiots and cowards.”
 The sniper had gotten carefully behind the boulder again and Lieutenant Berrendo
was squatting beside him.
 The captain, standing in the open beside the boulder, commenced to shout filth at the
hilltop. There is no language so filthy as Spanish. There are words for all the vile words
in English and there are other words and expressions that are used only in countries
where blasphemy keeps pace with the austerity of religion. Lieutenant Berrendo was a
very devout Catholic. So was the sniper. They were Carlists from Navarra and while
both of them cursed and blasphemed when they were angry they regarded it as a sin
which they regularly confessed.
 As they crouched now behind the boulder watching the captain and listening to what
he was shouting, they both disassociated themselves from him and what he was saying.
They did not want to have that sort of talk on their consciences on a day in which they
might die. Talking thus will not bring luck, the sniper thought. Speaking thus of the
Virgen is bad luck. This one speaks worse than the Reds.
 Julián is dead, Lieutenant Berrendo was thinking. Dead there on the slope on such a
day as this is. And this foul mouth stands there bringing more ill fortune with his
blasphemies.
 Now the captain stopped shouting and turned to Lieutenant Berrendo. His eyes looked
stranger than ever.
 “Paco,” he said, happily, “you and I will go up there.”
 “Not me.”
 “What?” The captain had his pistol out again.
 I hate these pistol brandishers, Berrendo was thinking. They cannot give an order
without jerking a gun out. They probably pull out their pistols when they go to the toilet
and order the move they will make.
 “I will go if you order me to. But under protest,” Lieutenant Berrendo told the captain.
 “Then I will go alone,” the captain said. “The smell of cowardice is too strong here.”
 Holding his pistol in his right hand, he strode steadily up the slope. Berrendo and the
sniper watched him. He was making no attempt to take any cover and he was looking
straight ahead of him at the rocks, the dead horse, and the fresh-dug dirt of the hilltop.
 El Sordo lay behind the horse at the corner of the rock, watching the captain come
striding up the hill.
 Only one, he thought. We get only one. But from his manner of speaking he is caza
mayor. Look at him walking. Look what an animal. Look at him stride forward. This one
“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway 172
is for me. This one I take with me on the trip. This one coming now makes the same
voyage I do. Come on, Comrade Voyager. Come striding. Come right along. Come
along to meet it. Come on. Keep on walking. Don’t slow up. Come right along. Come as
thou art coming. Don’t stop and look at those. That’s right. Don’t even look down. Keep
on coming with your eyes forward. Look, he has a moustache. What do you think of
that? He runs to a moustache, the Comrade Voyager. He is a captain. Look at his
sleeves. I said he was caza mayor. He has the face of an Inglés. Look. With a red face
and blond hair and blue eyes. With no cap on and his moustache is yellow. With blue
eyes. With pale blue eyes. With pale blue eyes with something wrong with them. With
pale blue eyes that don’t focus. Close enough. Too close. Yes, Comrade Voyager. Take
it, Comrade Voyager.
 He squeezed the trigger of the automatic rifle gently and it pounded back three times
against his shoulder with the slippery jolt the recoil of a tripoded automatic weapon
gives.
 The captain lay on his face on the hillside. His left arm was under him. His right arm
that had held the pistol was stretched forward of his head. From all down the slope they
were firing on the hill crest again.
 Crouched behind the boulder, thinking that now he would have to sprint across that
open space under fire, Lieutenant Berrendo heard the deep hoarse voice of Sordo from
the hilltop.
 “Bandidos!” the voice came. “Bandidos! Shoot me! Kill me!”
 On the top of the hill El Sordo lay behind the automatic rifle laughing so that his chest
ached, so that he thought the top of his head would burst.
 “Bandidos,” he shouted again happily. “Kill me, bandidos!” Then he shook his head
happily. We have lots of company for the Voyage, he thought.
 He was going to try for the other officer with the automatic rifle when he would leave
the shelter of the boulder. Sooner or later he would have to leave it. Sordo knew that he
could never command from there and he thought he had a very good chance to get him.
 Just then the others on the hill heard the first sound of the coming of the planes.
 El Sordo did not hear them. He was covering the down-slope edge of the boulder with
his automatic rifle and he was thinking: when I see him he will be running already and I
will miss him if I am not careful. I could shoot behind him all across that stretch. I should
swing the gun with him and ahead of him. Or let him start and then get on him and
ahead of him. I will try to pick him up there at the edge of the rock and swing just ahead
of him. Then he felt a touch on his shoulder and he turned and saw the gray, feardrained face of Joaquín and he looked where the boy was pointing and saw the three
planes coming.
 At this moment Lieutenant Berrendo broke from behind the boulder and, with his head
bent and his legs plunging, ran down and across the slope to the shelter of the rocks
where the automatic rifle was placed.
 Watching the planes, Sordo never saw him go.
 “Help me to pull this out,” he said to Joaquín and the boy dragged the automatic rifle
clear from between the horse and the rock.
 The planes were coming on steadily. They were in echelon and each second they
grew larger and their noise was greater.
 “Lie on your backs to fire at them,” Sordo said. “Fire ahead of them as they come.”
 He was watching them all the time. “Cabrones!Hijos de puta!” he said rapidly.
 “Ignacio!” he said. “Put the gun on the shoulder of the boy. Thou!” to Joaquín, “Sit
there and do not move. Crouch over. More. No. More.”
 He lay back and sighted with the automatic rifle as the planes came on steadily.
 “Thou, Ignacio, hold me the three legs of that tripod.” They were dangling down the
boy’s back and the muzzle of the gun was shaking from the jerking of his body that
Joaquín could not control as he crouched with bent head hearing the droning roar of
their coming.
 Lying flat on his belly and looking up into the sky watching them come, Ignacio
“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway 173
gathered the legs of the tripod into his two hands and steadied the gun.
 “Keep thy head down,” he said to Joaquín. “Keep thy head forward.”
 “Pasionaria says ‘Better to die on thy—’ “ Joaquín was saying to himself as the drone
came nearer them. Then he shifted suddenly into “Hail Mary, full of grace, the Lord is
with thee; Blessed art thou among women and Blessed is the fruit of thy womb, Jesus.
Holy Mary, Mother of God, pray for us sinners now and at the hour of our death. Amen.
Holy Mary, Mother of God,” he started, then he remembered quickly as the roar came
now unbearably and started an act of contrition racing in it, “Oh my God, I am heartily
sorry for having offended thee who art worthy of all my love—”
 Then there were the hammering explosions past his ears and the gun barrel hot
against his shoulder. It was hammering now again and his ears were deafened by the
muzzle blast. Ignacio was pulling down hard on the tripod and the barrel was burning his
back. It was hammering now in the roar and he could not remember the act of contrition.
 All he could remember was at the hour of our death. Amen. At the hour of our death.
Amen. At the hour. At the hour. Amen. The others all were firing. Now and at the hour of
our death. Amen.
 Then, through the hammering of the gun, there was the whistle of the air splitting apart
and then in the red black roar the earth rolled under his knees and then waved up to hit
him in the face and then dirt and bits of rock were falling all over and Ignacio was lying
on him and the gun was lying on him. But he was not dead because the whistle came
again and the earth rolled under him with the roar. Then it came again and the earth
lurched under his belly and one side of the hilltop rose into the air and then fell slowly
over them where they lay.
 The planes came back three times and bombed the hilltop but no one on the hilltop
knew it. Then the planes machine-gunned the hilltop and went away. As they dove on
the hill for the last time with their machine guns hammering, the first plane pulled up and
winged over and then each plane did the same and they moved from echelon to Vformation and went away into the sky in the direction of Segovia.
 Keeping a heavy fire on the hilltop, Lieutenant Berrendo pushed a patrol up to one of
the bomb craters from where they could throw grenades onto the crest. He was taking
no chances of any one being alive and waiting for them in the mess that was up there
and he threw four grenades into the confusion of dead horses, broken and split rocks,
and torn yellow-stained explosive-stinking earth before he climbed out of the bomb
crater and walked over to have a look.
 No one was alive on the hilltop except the boy Joaquín, who was unconscious under
the dead body of Ignacio. Joaquín was bleeding from the nose and from the ears. He
had known nothing and had no feeling since he had suddenly been in the very heart of
the thunder and the breath had been wrenched from his body when the one bomb
struck so close and Lieutenant Berrendo made the sign of the cross and then shot him
in the back of the head, as quickly and as gently, if such an abrupt movement can be
gentle, as Sordo had shot the wounded horse.
 Lieutenant Berrendo stood on the hilltop and looked down the slope at his own dead
and then across the country seeing where they had galloped before Sordo had turned at
bay here. He noticed all the dispositions that had been made of the troops and then he
ordered the dead men’s horses to be brought up and the bodies tied across the saddles
so that they might be packed in to La Granja.
 “Take that one, too,” he said. “The one with his hands on the automatic rifle. That
should be Sordo. He is the oldest and it was he with the gun. No. Cut the head off and
wrap it in a poncho.” He considered a minute. “You might as well take all the heads. And
of the others below on the slope and where we first found them. Collect the rifles and
pistols and pack that gun on a horse.”
 Then he walked down to where the lieutenant lay who had been killed in the first
assault. He looked down at him but did not touch him.
 “Qué cosa más mala es la guerra,” he said to himself, which meant, “What a bad thing
war is.”
“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway 174
 Then he made the sign of the cross again and as he walked down the hill he said five
Our Fathers and five Hail Marys for the repose of the soul of his dead comrade. He did
not wish to stay to see his orders being carried out.
28
 After the planes went away Robert Jordan and Primitivo heard the firing start and his
heart seemed to start again with it. A cloud of smoke drifted over the last ridge that he
could see in the high country and the planes were three steadily receding specks in the
sky.
 They’ve probably bombed hell out of their own cavalry and never touched Sordo and
Company, Robert Jordan said to himself. The damned planes scare you to death but
they don’t kill you.
 “The combat goes on,” Primitivo said, listening to the heavy firing. He had winced at
each bomb thud and now he licked his dry lips.
 “Why not?” Robert Jordan said. “Those things never kill anybody.”
 Then the firing stopped absolutely and he did not hear another shot. Lieutenant
Berrendo’s pistol shot did not carry that far.
 When the firing first stopped it did not affect him. Then as the quiet kept on a hollow
feeling came in his chest. Then he heard the grenades burst and for a moment his heart
rose. Then everything was quiet again and the quiet kept on and he knew that it was
over.
 Maria came up from the camp with a tin bucket of stewed hare with mushrooms
sunken in the rich gravy and a sack with bread, a leather wine bottle, four tin plates, two
cups and four spoons. She stopped at the gun and ladled out two plates for Agustín and
Eladio, who had replaced Anselmo at the gun, and gave them bread and unscrewed the
horn tip of the wine bottle and poured two cups of wine.
 Robert Jordan watched her climbing lithely up to his lookout post, the sack over her
shoulder, the bucket in one hand, her cropped head bright in the sun. He climbed down
and took the bucket and helped her up the last boulder.
 “What did the aviation do?” she asked, her eyes frightened.
 “Bombed Sordo.”
 He had the bucket open and was ladling out stew onto a plate.
 “Are they still fighting?”
 “No. It is over.”
 “Oh,” she said and bit her lip and looked out across the country.
 “I have no appetite,” Primitivo said.
 “Eat anyway,” Robert Jordan told him.
 “I could not swallow food.”
 “Take a drink of this, man,” Robert Jordan said and handed him the wine bottle. “Then
eat.”
 “This of Sordo has taken away desire,” Primitivo said. “Eat, thou. I have no desire.”
 Maria went over to him and put her arms around his neck and kissed him.
 “Eat, old one,” she said. “Each one should take care of his strength.”
 Primitivo turned away from her. He took the wine bottle and tipping his head back
swallowed steadily while he squirted a jet of wine into the back of his mouth. Then he
filled his plate from the bucket and commenced to eat.
 Robert Jordan looked at Maria and shook his head. She sat down by him and put her
arm around his shoulder. Each knew how the other felt and they sat there and Robert
Jordan ate the stew, taking time to appreciate the mushrooms completely, and he drank
the wine and they said nothing.
 “You may stay here, guapa, if you want,” he said after a while when the food was all
eaten.
 “Nay,” she said. “I must go to Pilar.”
 “It is all right to stay here. I do not think that anything will happen now.”
“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway 175
 “Nay. I must go to Pilar. She is giving me instruction.”
 “What does she give thee?”
 “Instruction.” She smiled at him and then kissed him. “Did you never hear of religious
instruction?” She blushed. “It is something like that.” She blushed again. “But different.”
 “Go to thy instruction,” he said and patted her on the head. She smiled at him again,
then said to Primitivo, “Do you want anything from below?”
 “No, daughter,” he said. They both saw that he was still not yet recovered.
 “Salud, old one,” she said to him.
 “Listen,” Primitivo said. “I have no fear to die but to leave them alone thus—” his voice
broke.
 “There was no choice,” Robert Jordan told him.
 “I know. But all the same.”
 “There was no choice,” Robert Jordan repeated. “And now it is better not to speak of
it.”
 “Yes. But there alone with no aid from us—”
 “Much better not to speak of it,” Robert Jordan said. “And thou, guapa, get thee to thy
instruction.”
 He watched her climb down through the rocks. Then he sat there for a long time
thinking and watching the high country.
 Primitivo spoke to him but he did not answer. It was hot in the sun but he did not
notice the heat while he sat watching the hill slopes and the long patches of pine trees
that stretched up the highest slope. An hour passed and the sun was far to his left now
when he saw them coming over the crest of the slope and he picked up his glasses.
 The horses showed small and minute as the first two riders came into sight on the
long green slope of the high hill. Then there were four more horsemen coming down,
spread out across the wide hill and then through his glasses he saw the double column
of men and horses ride into the sharp clarity of his vision. As he watched them he felt
sweat come from his armpits and run down his flanks. One man rode at the head of the
column. Then came more horsemen. Then came the riderless horses with their burdens
tied across the saddles. Then there were two riders. Then came the wounded with men
walking by them as they rode. Then came more cavalry to close the column.
 Robert Jordan watched them ride down the slope and out of sight into the timber. He
could not see at that distance the load one saddle bore of a long rolled poncho tied at
each end and at intervals so that it bulged between each lashing as a pod bulges with
peas. This was tied across the saddle and at each end it was lashed to the stirrup
leathers. Alongside this on the top of the saddle the automatic rifle Sordo had served
was lashed arrogantly.
 Lieutenant Berrendo, who was riding at the head of the column, his flankers out, his
point pushed well forward, felt no arrogance. He felt only the hollowness that comes
after action. He was thinking: taking the heads is barbarous. But proof and identification
is necessary. I will have trouble enough about this as it is and who knows? This of the
heads may appeal to them. There are those of them who like such things. It is possible
they will send them all to Burgos. It is a barbarous business. The planes were muchos.
Much. Much. But we could have done it all, and almost without losses, with a Stokes
mortar. Two mules to carry the shells and a mule with a mortar on each side of the pack
saddle. What an army we would be then! With the fire power of all these automatic
weapons. And another mule. No, two mules to carry ammunition. Leave it alone, he told
himself. It is no longer cavalry. Leave it alone. You’re building yourself an army. Next
you will want a mountain gun.
 Then he thought of Julián, dead on the hill, dead now, tied across a horse there in the
first troop, and as he rode down into the dark pine forest, leaving the sunlight behind him
on the hill, riding now in the quiet dark of the forest, he started to say a prayer for him
again.
 “Hail, holy queen mother of mercy,” he started. “Our life, our sweetness and our hope.
To thee do we send up our sighs, mournings and weepings in this valley of tears—”
“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway 176
 He went on with the prayer the horses’ hooves soft on the fallen pine needles, the light
coming through the tree trunks in patches as it comes through the columns of a
cathedral, and as he prayed he looked ahead to see his flankers riding through the
trees.
 He rode out of the forest onto the yellow road that led into La Granja and the horses’
hooves raised a dust that hung over them as they rode. It powdered the dead who were
tied face down across the saddles and the wounded, and those who walked beside
them, were in thick dust.
 It was here that Anselmo saw them ride past in their dust.
 He counted the dead and the wounded and he recognized Sordo’s automatic rifle. He
did not know what the poncho-wrapped bundle was which flapped against the led
horse’s flanks as the stirrup leathers swung but when, on his way home, he came in the
dark onto the hill where Sordo had fought, he knew at once what the long poncho roll
contained. In the dark he could not tell who had been up on the hill. But he counted
those that lay there and then made off across the hills for Pablo’s camp.
 Walking alone in the dark, with a fear like a freezing of his heart from the feeling the
holes of the bomb craters had given him, from them and from what he had found on the
hill, he put all thought of the next day out of his mind. He simply walked as fast as he
could to bring the news. And as he walked he prayed for the souls of Sordo and of all
his band. It was the first time he had prayed since the start of the movement.
 “Most kind, most sweet, most clement Virgin,” he prayed.
 But he could not keep from thinking of the next day finally. So he thought: I will do
exactly as the Inglés says and as he says to do it. But let me be close to him, O Lord,
and may his instructions be exact for I do not think that I could control myself under the
bombardment of the planes. Help me, O Lord, tomorrow to comport myself as a man
should in his last hours. Help me, O Lord, to understand clearly the needs of the day.
Help me, O Lord, to dominate the movement of my legs that I should not run when the
bad moment comes. Help me, O Lord, to comport myself as a man tomorrow in the day
of battle. Since I have asked this aid of thee, please grant it, knowing I would not ask it if
it were not serious, and I will ask nothing more of thee again.
 Walking in the dark alone he felt much better from having prayed and he was sure,
now, that he would comport himself well. Walking now down from the high country, he
went back to praying for the people of Sordo and in a short time he had reached the
upper post where Fernando challenged him.
 “It is I,” he answered, “Anselmo.”
 “Good,” Fernando said.
 “You know of this of Sordo, old one?” Anselmo asked Fernando, the two of them
standing at the entrance of the big rocks in the dark.
 “Why not?” Fernando said. “Pablo has told us.”
 “He was up there?”
 “Why not?” Fernando said stolidly. “He visited the hill as soon as the cavalry left.”
 “He told you—”
 “He told us all,” Fernando said. “What barbarians these fascists are! We must do away
with all such barbarians in Spain.” He stopped, then said bitterly, “In them is lacking all
conception of dignity.”
 Anselmo grinned in the dark. An hour ago he could not have imagined that he would
ever smile again. What a marvel, that Fernando, he thought.
 “Yes,” he said to Fernando. “We must teach them. We must take away their planes,
their automatic weapons, their tanks, their artillery and teach them dignity.”
 “Exactly,” Fernando said. “I am glad that you agree.”
 Anselmo left him standing there alone with his dignity and went on down to the cave.
“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway 177
29
 Anselmo found Robert Jordan sitting at the plank table inside the cave with Pablo
opposite him. They had a bowl poured full of wine between them and each had a cup of
wine on the table. Robert Jordan had his notebook out and he was holding a pencil.
Pilar and Maria were in the back of the cave out of sight. There was no way for Anselmo
to know that the woman was keeping the girl back there to keep her from hearing the
conversation and he thought that it was odd that Pilar was not at the table.
 Robert Jordan looked up as Anselmo came in under the blanket that hung over the
opening. Pablo stared straight at the table. His eyes were focused on the wine bowl but
he was not seeing it.
 “I come from above,” Anselmo said to Robert Jordan.
 “Pablo has told us,” Robert Jordan said.
 “There were six dead on the hill and they had taken the heads,” Anselmo said. “I was
there in the dark.”
 Robert Jordan nodded. Pablo sat there looking at the wine bowl and saying nothing.
There was no expression on his face and his small pig-eyes were looking at the wine
bowl as though he had never seen one before.
 “Sit down,” Robert Jordan said to Anselmo.
 The old man sat down at the table on one of the hide-covered stools and Robert
Jordan reached under the table and brought up the pinch-bottle of whiskey that had
been the gift of Sordo. It was about half-full. Robert Jordan reached down the table for a
cup and poured a drink of whiskey into it and shoved it along the table to Anselmo.
 “Drink that, old one,” he said.
 Pablo looked from the wine bowl to Anselmo’s face as he drank and then he looked
back at the wine bowl.
 As Anselmo swallowed the whiskey he felt a burning in his nose, his eyes and his
mouth, and then a happy, comforting warmth in his stomach. He wiped his mouth with
the back of his hand.
 Then he looked at Robert Jordan and said, “Can I have another?”
 “Why not?” Robert Jordan said and poured another drink from the bottle and handed it
this time instead of pushing it.
 This time there was not the burning when he swallowed but the warm comfort
doubled. It was as good a thing for his spirit as a saline injection is for a man who has
suffered a great hemorrhage.
 The old man looked toward the bottle again.
 “The rest is for tomorrow,” Robert Jordan said. “What passed on the road, old one?”
 “There was much movement,” Anselmo said. “I have it all noted down as you showed
me. I have one watching for me and noting now. Later I will go for her report.”
 “Did you see anti-tank guns? Those on rubber tires with the long barrels?”
 “Yes,” Anselmo said. “There were four camions which passed on the road. In each of
them there was such a gun with pine branches spread across the barrels. In the trucks
rode six men with each gun.”
 “Four guns, you say?” Robert Jordan asked him.
 “Four,” Anselmo said. He did not look at his papers.
 “Tell me what else went up the road.”
 While Robert Jordan noted Anselmo told him everything he had seen move past him
on the road. He told it from the beginning and in order with the wonderful memory of
those who cannot read or write, and twice, while he was talking, Pablo reached out for
more wine from the bowl.
 “There was also the cavalry which entered La Granja from the high country where El
Sordo fought,” Anselmo went on.
 Then he told the number of the wounded he had seen and the number of the dead
across the saddles.
 “There was a bundle packed across one saddle that I did not understand,” he said.
“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway 178
“But now I know it was the heads.” He went on without pausing. “It was a squadron of
cavalry. They had only one officer left. He was not the one who was here in the early
morning when you were by the gun. He must have been one of the dead. Two of the
dead were officers by their sleeves. They were lashed face down over the saddles, their
arms hanging. Also they had the máquina of El Sordo tied to the saddle that bore the
heads. The barrel was bent. That is all,” he finished.
 “It is enough,” Robert Jordan said and dipped his cup into the wine bowl. “Who beside
you has been through the lines to the side of the Republic?”
 “Andrés and Eladio.”
 “Which is the better of those two?”
 “Andrés.”
 “How long would it take him to get to Navacerrada from here?”
 “Carrying no pack and taking his precautions, in three hours with luck. We came by a
longer, safer route because of the material.”
 “He can surely make it?”
 “No sé, there is no such thing as surely.”
 “Not for thee either?”
 “Nay.”
 That decides that, Robert Jordan thought to himself. If he had said that he could make
it surely, surely I would have sent him.
 “Andrés can get there as well as thee?”
 “As well or better. He is younger.”
 “But this must absolutely get there.”
 “If nothing happens he will get there. If anything happens it could happen to any one.”
 “I will write a dispatch and send it by him,” Robert Jordan said. “I will explain to him
where he can find the General. He will be at the Estado Mayor of the Division.”
 “He will not understand all this of divisions and all,” Anselmo said. “Always has it
confused me. He should have the name of the General and where he can be found.”
 “But it is at the Estado Mayor of the Division that he will be found.”
 “But is that not a place?”
 “Certainly it is a place, old one,” Robert Jordan explained patiently. “But it is a place
the General will have selected. It is where he will make his headquarters for the battle.”
 “Where is it then?” Anselmo was tired and the tiredness was making him stupid. Also
words like Brigades, Divisions, Army Corps confused him. First there had been columns,
then there were regiments, then there were brigades. Now there were brigades and
divisions, both. He did not understand. A place was a place.
 “Take it slowly, old one,” Robert Jordan said. He knew that if he could not make
Anselmo understand he could never explain it clearly to Andrés either. “The Estado
Mayor of the Division is a place the General will have picked to set up his organization
to command. He commands a division, which is two brigades. I do not know where it is
because I was not there when it was picked. It will probably be a cave or dugout, a
refuge, and wires will run to it. Andrés must ask for the General and for the Estado
Mayor of the Division. He must give this to the General or to the Chief of his Estado
Mayor or to another whose name I will write. One of them will surely be there even if the
others are out inspecting the preparations for the attack. Do you understand now?”
 “Yes.”
 “Then get Andrés and I will write it now and seal it with this seal.” He showed him the
small, round, wooden-backed rubber stamp with the seal of the S. I. M. and the round,
tin-covered inking pad no bigger than a fifty-cent piece he carried in his pocket. “That
seal they will honor. Get Andrés now and I will explain to him. He must go quickly but
first he must understand.”
 “He will understand if I do. But you must make it very clear. This of staffs and divisions
is a mystery to me. Always have I gone to such things as definite places such as a
house. In Navacerrada it is in the old hotel where the place of command is. In
Guadarrama it is in a house with a garden.”
“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway 179
 “With this General,” Robert Jordan said, “it will be some place very close to the lines. It
will be underground to protect from the planes. Andrés will find it easily by asking, if he
knows what to ask for. He will only need to show what I have written. But fetch him now
for this should get there quickly.”
 Anselmo went out, ducking under the hanging blanket. Robert Jordan commenced
writing in his notebook.
 “Listen, Inglés,” Pablo said, still looking at the wine bowl.
 “I am writing,” Robert Jordan said without looking up.
 “Listen, Inglés,” Pablo spoke directly to the wine bowl. “There is no need to be
disheartened in this. Without Sordo we have plenty of people to take the posts and blow
thy bridge.”
 “Good,” Robert Jordan said without stopping writing.
 “Plenty,” Pablo said. “I have admired thy judgment much today, Inglés,” Pablo told the
wine bowl. “I think thou hast much picardia. That thou art smarter than I am. I have
confidence in thee.”
 Concentrating on his report to Golz, trying to put it in the fewest words and still make it
absolutely convincing, trying to put it so the attack would be cancelled, absolutely, yet
convince them he wasn’t trying to have it called off because of any fears he might have
about the danger of his own mission, but wished only to put them in possession of all
the facts, Robert Jordan was hardly half listening.
 “Inglés,” Pablo said.
 “I am writing,” Robert Jordan told him without looking up.
 I probably should send two copies, he thought. But if I do we will not have enough
people to blow it if I have to blow it. What do I know about why this attack is made?
Maybe it is only a holding attack. Maybe they want to draw those troops from
somewhere else. Perhaps they make it to draw those planes from the North. Maybe that
is what it is about. Perhaps it is not expected to succeed. What do I know about it? This
is my report to Golz. I do not blow the bridge until the attack starts. My orders are clear
and if the attack is called off I blow nothing. But I’ve got to keep enough people here for
the bare minimum necessary to carry the orders out.
 “What did you say?” he asked Pablo.
 “That I have confidence, Inglés.” Pablo was still addressing the wine bowl.
 Man, I wish I had, Robert Jordan thought. He went on writing.
30
 So now everything had been done that there was to do that night. All orders had been
given. Every one knew exactly what he was to do in the morning. Andrés had been gone
three hours. Either it would come now with the coming of the daylight or it would not
come. I believe that it will come, Robert Jordan told himself, walking back down from the
upper post where he had gone to speak to Primitivo.
 Golz makes the attack but he has not the power to cancel it. Permission to cancel it
will have to come from Madrid. The chances are they won’t be able to wake anybody up
there and if they do wake up they will be too sleepy to think. I should have gotten word
to Golz sooner of the preparations they have made to meet the attack, but how could I
send word about something until it happened? They did not move up that stuff until just
at dark. They did not want to have any movement on the road spotted by planes. But
what about all their planes? What about those fascist planes?
 Surely our people must have been warned by them. But perhaps the fascists were
faking for another offensive down through Guadalajara with them. There were supposed
to be Italian troops concentrated in Soria, and at Siguenza again besides those
operating in the North. They haven’t enough troops or material to run two major
offensives at the same time though. That is impossible; so it must be just a bluff.
 But we know how many troops the Italians have landed all last month and the month
before at Cádiz. It is always possible they will try again at Guadalajara, not stupidly as
“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway 180
before, but with three main fingers coming down to broaden it out and carry it along the
railway to the west of the plateau. There was a way that they could do it all right. Hans
had shown him. They made many mistakes the first time. The whole conception was
unsound. They had not used any of the same troops in the Arganda offensive against
the Madrid-Valencia road that they used at Guadalajara. Why had they not made those
same drives simultaneously? Why? Why? When would we know why?
 Yet we had stopped them both times with the very same troops. We never could have
stopped them if they had pulled both drives at once. Don’t worry, he told himself. Look at
the miracles that have happened before this. Either you will have to blow that bridge in
the morning or you will not have to. But do not start deceiving yourself into thinking you
won’t have to blow it. You will blow it one day or you will blow it another. Or if it is not
this bridge it will be some other bridge. It is not you who decides what shall be done.
You follow orders. Follow them and do not try to think beyond them.
 The orders on this are very clear. Too very clear. But you must not worry nor must you
be frightened. For if you allow yourself the luxury of normal fear that fear will infect those
who must work with you.
 But that heads business was quite a thing all the same, he told himself. And the old
man running onto them on the hilltop alone. How would you have liked to run onto them
like that? That impressed you, didn’t it? Yes, that impressed you, Jordan. You have
been quite impressed more than once today. But you have behaved O.K. So far you
have behaved all right.
 You do very well for an instructor in Spanish at the University of Montana, he joked at
himself. You do all right for that. But do not start to thinking that you are anything very
special. You haven’t gotten very far in this business. Just remember Durán, who never
had any military training and who was a composer and lad about town before the
movement and is now a damned good general commanding a brigade. It was all as
simple and easy to learn and understand to Durán as chess to a child chess prodigy.
You had read on and studied the art of war ever since you were a boy and your
grandfather had started you on the American Civil War. Except that Grandfather always
called it the War of the Rebellion. But compared with Durán you were like a good sound
chess player against a boy prodigy. Old Durán. It would be good to see Durán again. He
would see him at Gaylord’s after this was over. Yes. After this was over. See how well
he was behaving?
 I’ll see him at Gaylord’s, he said to himself again, after this is over. Don’t kid yourself,
he said. You do it all perfectly O.K. Cold. Without kidding yourself. You aren’t going to
see Durán any more and it is of no importance. Don’t be that way either, he told himself.
Don’t go in for any of those luxuries.
 Nor for heroic resignation either. We do not want any citizens full of heroic resignation
in these hills. Your grandfather fought four years in our Civil War and you are just
finishing your first year in this war. You have a long time to go yet and you are very well
fitted for the work. And now you have Maria, too. Why, you’ve got everything. You
shouldn’t worry. What is a little brush between a guerilla band and a squadron of
cavalry? That isn’t anything. What if they took the heads? Does that make any
difference? None at all.
 The Indians always took the scalps when Grandfather was at Fort Kearny after the
war. Do you remember the cabinet in your father’s office with the arrowheads spread out
on a shelf, and the eagle feathers of the war bonnets that hung on the wall, their plumes
slanting, the smoked buckskin smell of the leggings and the shirts and the feel of the
beaded moccasins? Do you remember the great stave of the buffalo bow that leaned in
a corner of the cabinet and the two quivers of hunting and war arrows, and how the
bundle of shafts felt when you closed your hand around them?
 Remember something like that. Remember something concrete and practical.
Remember Grandfather’s saber, bright and well oiled in its dented scabbard and
Grandfather showed you how the blade had been thinned from the many times it had
been to the grinder’s. Remember Grandfather’s Smith and Wesson. It was a single
“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway 181
action, officer’s model .32 caliber and there was no trigger guard. It had the softest,
sweetest trigger pull you had ever felt and it was always well oiled and the bore was
clean although the finish was all worn off and the brown metal of the barrel and the
cylinder was worn smooth from the leather of the holster. It was kept in the holster with a
U.S. on the flap in a drawer in the cabinet with its cleaning equipment and two hundred
rounds of cartridges. Their cardboard boxes were wrapped and tied neatly with waxed
twine.
 You could take the pistol out of the drawer and hold it. “Handle it freely,” was
Grandfather’s expression. But you could not play with it because it was “a serious
weapon.”
 You asked Grandfather once if he had ever killed any one with it and he said, “Yes.”
 Then you said, “When, Grandfather?” and he said, “In the War of the Rebellion and
afterwards.”
 You said, “Will you tell me about it, Grandfather?”
 And he said, “I do not care to speak about it, Robert.”
 Then after your father had shot himself with this pistol, and you had come home from
school and they’d had the funeral, the coroner had returned it after the inquest saying,
“Bob, I guess you might want to keep the gun. I’m supposed to hold it, but I know your
dad set a lot of store by it because his dad packed it all through the War, besides out
here when he first came out with the Cavalry, and it’s still a hell of a good gun. I had her
out trying her this afternoon. She don’t throw much of a slug but you can hit things with
her.”
 He had put the gun back in the drawer in the cabinet where it belonged, but the next
day he took it out and he had ridden up to the top of the high country above Red Lodge,
with Chub, where they had built the road to Cooke City now over the pass and across
the Bear Tooth plateau, and up there where the wind was thin and there was snow all
summer on the hills they had stopped by the lake which was supposed to be eight
hundred feet deep and was a deep green color, and Chub held the two horses and he
climbed out on a rock and leaned over and saw his face in the still water, and saw
himself holding the gun, and then he dropped it, holding it by the muzzle, and saw it go
down making bubbles until it was just as big as a watch charm in that clear water, and
then it was out of sight. Then he came back off the rock and when he swung up into the
saddle he gave old Bess such a clout with the spurs she started to buck like an old
rocking horse. He bucked her out along the shore Qf the lake and as soon as she was
reasonable they went on back along the trail.
 “I know why you did that with the old gun, Bob,” Chub said.
 “Well, then we don’t have to talk about it,” he had said.
 They never talked about it and that was the end of Grandfather’s side arms except for
the saber. He still had the saber in his trunk with the rest of his things at Missoula.
 I wonder what Grandfather would think of this situation, he thought. Grandfather was a
hell of a good soldier, everybody said. They said if he had been with Custer that day he
never would have let him be sucked in that way. How could he ever not have seen the
smoke nor the dust of all those lodges down there in the draw along the Little Big Horn
unless there must have been a heavy morning mist? But there wasn’t any mist.
 I wish Grandfather were here instead of me. Well, maybe we will all be together by
tomorrow night. If there should be any such damn fool business as a hereafter, and I’m
sure there isn’t, he thought, I would certainly like to talk to him. Because there are a lot
of things I would like to know. I have a right to ask him now because I have had to do
the same sort of things myself. I don’t think he’d mind my asking now. I had no right to
ask before. I understand him not telling me because he didn’t know me. But now I think
that we would get along all right. I’d like to be able to talk to him now and get his advice.
Hell, if I didn’t get advice I’d just like to talk to him. It’s a shame there is such a jump in
time between ones like us.
 Then, as he thought, he realized that if there was any such thing as ever meeting,
both he and his grandfather would be acutely embarrassed by the presence of his
“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway 182
father. Any one has a right to do it, he thought. But it isn’t a good thing to do. I
understand it, but I do not approve of it. Lache was the word. But you do understand it?
Sure, I understand it but. Yes, but. You have to be awfully occupied with yourself to do a
thing like that.
 Aw hell, I wish Grandfather was here, he thought. For about an hour anyway. Maybe
he sent me what little I have through that other one that misused the gun. Maybe that is
the only communication that we have. But, damn it. Truly damn it, but I wish the time-lag
wasn’t so long so that I could have learned from him what the other one never had to
teach me. But suppose the fear he had to go through and dominate and just get rid of
finally in four years of that and then in the Indian fighting, although in that, mostly, there
couldn’t have been so much fear, had made a cobarde out of the other one the way
second generation bullfighters almost always are? Suppose that? And maybe the good
juice only came through straight again after passing through that one?
 I’ll never forget how sick it made me the first time I knew he was a cobarde. Go on,
say it in English. Coward. It’s easier when you have it said and there is never any point
in referring to a son of a bitch by some foreign term. He wasn’t any son of a bitch,
though. He was just a coward and that was the worst luck any man could have.
Because if he wasn’t a coward he would have stood up to that woman and not let her
bully him. I wonder what I would have been like if he had married a different woman?
That’s something you’ll never know, he thought, and grinned. Maybe the bully in her
helped to supply what was missing in the other. And you. Take it a little easy. Don’t get
to referring to the good juice and such other things until you are through tomorrow. Don’t
be snotty too soon. And then don’t be snotty at all. We’ll see what sort of juice you have
tomorrow.
 But he started thinking about Grandfather again.
 “George Custer was not an intelligent leader of cavalry, Robert,” his grandfather had
said. “He was not even an intelligent man.”
 He remembered that when his grandfather said that he felt resentment that any one
should speak against that figure in the buckskin shirt, the yellow curls blowing, that
stood on that hill holding a service revolver as the Sioux closed in around him in the old
Anheuser-Busch lithograph that hung on the poolroom wall in Red Lodge.
 “He just had great ability to get himself in and out of trouble,” his grandfather went on,
“and on the Little Big Horn he got into it but he couldn’t get out.
 “Now Phil Sheridan was an intelligent man and so was Jeb Stuart. But John Mosby
was the finest cavalry leader that ever lived.”
 He had a letter in his things in the trunk at Missoula from General Phil Sheridan to old
Killy-the-Horse Kilpatrick that said his grandfather was a finer leader of irregular cavalry
than John Mosby.
 I ought to tell Golz about my grandfather, he thought. He wouldn’t ever have heard of
him though. He probably never even heard of John Mosby. The British all had heard of
them though because they had to study our Civil War much more than people did on the
Continent. Karkov said after this was over I could go to the Lenin Institute in Moscow if I
wanted to. He said I could go to the military academy of the Red Army if I wanted to do
that. I wonder what Grandfather would think of that? Grandfather, who never knowingly
sat at table with a Democrat in his life.
 Well, I don’t want to be a soldier, he thought. I know that. So that’s out. I just want us
to win this war. I guess really good soldiers are really good at very little else, he thought.
That’s obviously untrue. Look at Napoleon and Wellington. You’re very stupid this
evening, he thought.
 Usually his mind was very good company and tonight it had been when he thought
about his grandfather. Then thinking of his father had thrown him off. He understood his
father and he forgave him everything and he pitied him but he was ashamed of him.
 You better not think at all, he told himself. Soon you will be with Maria and you won’t
have to think. That’s the best way now that everything is worked out. When you have
been concentrating so hard on something you can’t stop and your brain gets to racing
“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway 183
like a flywheel with the weight gone. You better just not think.
 But just suppose, he thought. Just suppose that when the planes unload they smash
those anti-tank guns and just blow hell out of the positions and the old tanks roll good up
whatever hill it is for once and old Golz boots that bunch of drunks, clochards, bums,
fanatics and heroes that make up the Quatorzieme Brigade ahead of him, and I know
how good Durán’s people are in Golz’s other brigade, and we are in Segovia tomorrow
night.
 Yes. Just suppose, he said to himself. I’ll settle for La Granja, he told himself. But you
are going to have to blow that bridge, he suddenly knew absolutely. There won’t be any
calling off. Because the way you have just been supposing there for a minute is how the
possibilities of that attack look to those who have ordered it. Yes, you will have to blow
the bridge, he knew truly. Whatever happens to Andrés doesn’t matter.
 Coming down the trail there in the dark, alone with the good feeling that everything
that had to be done was over for the next four hours, and with the confidence that had
come from thinking back to concrete things, the knowledge that he would surely have to
blow the bridge came to him almost with comfort.
 The uncertainty, the enlargement of the feeling of being uncertain, as when, through a
misunderstanding of possible dates, one does not know whether the guests are really
coming to a party, that had been with him ever since he had dispatched Andrés with the
report to Golz, had all dropped from him now. He was sure now that the festival would
not be cancelled. It’s much better to be sure, he thought. It’s always much better to be
sure.
31
 So now they were in the robe again together and it was late in the last night. Maria lay
close against him and he felt the long smoothness of her thighs against his and her
breasts like two small hills that rise out of the long plain where there is a well, and the far
country beyond the hills was the valley of her throat where his lips were. He lay very
quiet and did not think and she stroked his head with her hand.
 “Roberto,” Maria said very softly and kissed him. “I am ashamed. I do not wish to
disappoint thee but there is a great soreness and much pain. I do not think I would be
any good to thee.”
 “There is always a great soreness and much pain,” he said. “Nay, rabbit. That is
nothing. We will do nothing that makes pain.”
 “It is not that. It is that I am not good to receive thee as I wish to.”
 “That is of no importance. That is a passing thing. We are together when we lie
together.”
 “Yes, but I am ashamed. I think it was from when things were done to me that it
comes. Not from thee and me.”
 “Let us not talk of that.”
 “Nor do I wish to. I meant I could not bear to fail thee now on this night and so I sought
to excuse myself.”
 “Listen, rabbit,” he said. “All such things pass and then there is no problem.” But he
thought; it was not good luck for the last night.
 Then he was ashamed and said, “Lie close against me, rabbit. I love thee as much
feeling thee against me in here in the dark as I love thee making love.”
 “I am deeply ashamed because I thought it might be again tonight as it was in the high
country when we came down from El Sordo’s.”
 “Qué va,” he said to her. “That is not for every day. I like it thus as well as the other.”
He lied, putting aside disappointment. “We will be here together quietly and we will
sleep. Let us talk together. I know thee very little from talking.”
 “Should we speak of tomorrow and of thy work? I would like to be intelligent about thy
work.”
 “No,” he said and relaxed completely into the length of the robe and lay now quietly
“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway 184
with his cheek against her shoulder, his left arm under her head. “The most intelligent is
not to talk about tomorrow nor what happened today. In this we do not discuss the
losses and what we must do tomorrow we will do. Thou art not afraid?”
 “Qué va,” she said. “I am always afraid. But now I am afraid for thee so much I do not
think of me.”
 “Thou must not, rabbit. I have been in many things. And worse than this,” he lied.
 Then suddenly surrendering to something, to the luxury of going into unreality, he
said, “Let us talk of Madrid and of us in Madrid.”
 “Good,” she said. Then, “Oh, Roberto, I am sorry I have failed thee. Is there not some
other thing that I can do for thee?”
 He stroked her head and kissed her and then lay close and relaxed beside her,
listening to the quiet of the night.
 “Thou canst talk with me of Madrid,” he said and thought: I’ll keep any oversupply of
that for tomorrow. I’ll need all of that there is tomorrow. There are no pine needles that
need that now as I will need it tomorrow. Who was it cast his seed upon the ground in
the Bible? Onan. How did Onan turn out? he thought. I don’t remember ever hearing
any more about Onan. He smiled in the dark.
 Then he surrendered again and let himself slip into it, feeling a voluptuousness of
surrender into unreality that was like a sexual acceptance of something that could come
in the night when there was no understanding, only the delight of acceptance.
 “My beloved,” he said, and kissed her. “Listen. The other night I was thinking about
Madrid and I thought how I would get there and leave thee at the hotel while I went up to
see people at the hotel of the Russians. But that was false. I would not leave thee at any
hotel.”
 “Why not?”
 “Because I will take care of thee. I will not ever leave thee. I will go with thee to the
Seguridad to get papers. Then I will go with thee to buy those clothes that are needed.”
 “They are few, and I can buy them.”
 “Nay, they are many and we will go together and buy good ones and thou wilt be
beautiful in them.”
 “I would rather we stayed in the room in the hotel and sent Out for the clothes. Where
is the hotel?”
 “It is on the Plaza del Callao. We will be much in that room in that hotel. There is a
wide bed with clean sheets and there is hot running water in the bathtub and there are
two closets and I will keep my things in one and thou wilt take the other. And there are
tall, wide windows that open, and outside, in the streets, there is the spring. Also I know
good places to eat that are illegal but with good food, and I know shops where there is
still wine and whiskey. And we will keep things to eat in the room for when we are
hungry and also whiskey for when I wish a drink and I will buy thee manzanilla.”
 “I would like to try the whiskey.”
 “But since it is difficult to obtain and if thou likest manzanilla.”
 “Keep thy whiskey, Roberto,” she said. “Oh, I love thee very much. Thou and thy
whiskey that I could not have. What a pig thou art.”
 “Nay, you shall try it. But it is not good for a woman.”
 “And I have only had things that were good for a woman,” Maria said. “Then there in
bed I will still wear my wedding shirt?”
 “Nay. I will buy thee various nightgowns and pajamas too if you should prefer them.”
 “I will buy seven wedding shirts,” she said. “One for each day of the week. And I will
buy a clean wedding shirt for thee. Dost ever wash thy shirt?”
 “Sometimes.”
 “I will keep everything clean and I will pour thy whiskey and put the water in it as it was
done at Sordo’s. I will obtain olives and salted codfish and hazel nuts for thee to eat
while thou drinkest and we will stay in the room for a month and never leave it. If I am fit
to receive thee,” she said, suddenly unhappy.
 “That is nothing,” Robert Jordan told her. “Truly it is nothing. It is possible thou wert
“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway 185
hurt there once and now there is a scar that makes a further hurting. Such a thing is
possible. All such things pass. And also there are good doctors in Madrid if there is truly
anything.”
 “But all was good before,” she said pleadingly.
 “That is the promise that all will be good again.”
 “Then let us talk again about Madrid.” She curled her legs between his and rubbed the
top of her head against his shoulder. “But will I not be so ugly there with this cropped
head that thou wilt be ashamed of me?”
 “Nay. Thou art lovely. Thou hast a lovely face and a beautiful body, long and light, and
thy skin is smooth and the color of burnt gold and every one will try to take thee from
me.”
 “Qué va, take me from thee,” she said. “No other man will ever touch me till I die. Take
me from thee! Qué va.”
 “But many will try. Thou wilt see.”
 “They will see I love thee so that they will know it would be as unsafe as putting their
hands into a caldron of melted lead to touch me. But thou? When thou seest beautiful
women of the same culture as thee? Thou wilt not be ashamed of me?”
 “Never. And I will marry thee.”
 “If you wish,” she said. “But since we no longer have the Church I do not think it
carries importance.”
 “I would like us to be married.”
 “If you wish. But listen. If we were ever in another country where there still was the
Church perhaps we could be married in it there.”
 “In my country they still have the Church,” he told her. “There we can be married in it if
it means aught to thee. I have never been married. There is no problem.”
 “I am glad thou hast never been married,” she said. “But I am glad thou knowest about
such things as you have told me for that means thou hast been with many women and
the Pilar told me that it is only such men who are possible for husbands. But thou wilt
not run with other women now? Because it would kill me.”
 “I have never run with many women,” he said, truly. “Until thee I did not think that I
could love one deeply.”
 She stroked his cheeks and then held her hands clasped behind his head. “Thou must
have known very many.”
 “Not to love them.”
 “Listen. The Pilar told me something—”
 “Say it.”
 “No. It is better not to. Let us talk again about Madrid.”
 “What was it you were going to say?”
 “I do not wish to say it.”
 “Perhaps it would be better to say it if it could be important.”
 “You think it is important?”
 “Yes.”
 “But how can you know when you do not know what it is?”
 “From thy manner.”
 “I will not keep it from you then. The Pilar told me that we would all die tomorrow and
that you know it as well as she does and that you give it no importance. She said this
not in criticism but in admiration.”
 “She said that?” he said. The crazy bitch, he thought, and he said, “That is more of her
gypsy manure. That is the way old market women and café cowards talk. That is
manuring obscenity.” He felt the sweat that came from under his armpits and slid down
between his arm and his side and he said to himself, So you are scared, eh? and aloud
he said, “She is a manure-mouthed superstitious bitch. Let us talk again of Madrid.”
 “Then you know no such thing?”
 “Of course not. Do not talk such manure,” he said, using a stronger, ugly word.
 But this time when he talked about Madrid there was no slipping into make-believe
“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway 186
again. Now he was just lying to his girl and to himself to pass the night before battle and
he knew it. He liked to do it, but all the luxury of the acceptance was gone. But he
started again.
 “I have thought about thy hair,” he said. “And what we can do about it. You see it
grows now all over thy head the same length like the fur of an animal and it is lovely to
feel and I love it very much and it is beautiful and it flattens and rises like a wheatfield in
the wind when I pass my hand over it.”
 “Pass thy hand over it.”
 He did and left his hand there and went on talking to her throat, as he felt his own
throat swell. “But in Madrid I thought we could go together to the coiffeur’s and they
could cut it neatly on the sides and in the back as they cut mine and that way it would
look better in the town while it is growing out.”
 “I would look like thee,” she said and held him close to her. “And then I never would
want to change it.”
 “Nay. It will grow all the time and that will only be to keep it neat at the start while it is
growing long. How long will it take it to grow long?”
 “Really long?”
 “No. I mean to thy shoulders. It is thus I would have thee wear it.”
 “As Garbo in the cinema?”
 “Yes,” he said thickly.
 Now the making believe was coming back in a great rush and he would take it all to
him. It had him now, and again he surrendered and went on. “So it will hang straight to
thy shoulders and curl at the ends as a wave of the sea curls, and it will be the color of
ripe wheat and thy face the color of burnt gold and thine eyes the only color they could
be with thy hair and thy skin, gold with the dark flecks in them, and I will push thy head
back and look in thy eyes and hold thee tight against me—”
 “Where?”
 “Anywhere. Wherever it is that we are. How long will it take for thy hair to grow?”
 “I do not know because it never had been cut before. But I think in six months it should
be long enough to hang well below my ears and in a year as long as thou couldst ever
wish. But do you know what will happen first?”
 “Tell me.”
 “We will be in the big clean bed in thy famous room in our famous hotel and we will sit
in the famous bed together and look into the mirror of the armoire and there will be thee
and there will be me in the glass and then I will turn to thee thus, and put my arms
around thee thus, and then I will kiss thee thus.”
 Then they lay quiet and close together in the night, hot-aching, rigid, close together
and holding her, Robert Jordan held closely too all those things that he knew could
never happen, and he went on with it deliberately and said, “Rabbit, we will not always
live in that hotel.”
 “Why not?”
 “We can get an apartment in Madrid on that street that runs along the Parque of the
Buen Retiro. I know an American woman who furnished apartments and rented them
before the movement and I know how to get such an apartment for only the rent that
was paid before the movement. There are apartments there that face on the park and
you can see all of the park from the windows; the iron fence, the gardens, and the gravel
walks and the green of the lawns where they touch the gravel, and the trees deep with
shadows and the many fountains, and now the chestnut trees will be in bloom. In Madrid
we can walk in the park and row on the lake if the water is back in it now.”
 “Why would the water be out?”
 “They drained it in November because it made a mark to sight from when the planes
came over for bombing. But I think that the water is back in it now. I am not sure. But
even if there is no water in it we can walk through all the park away from the lake and
there is a part that is like a forest with trees from all parts of the world with their names
on them, with placards that tell what trees they are and where they came from.”
“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway 187
 “I would almost as soon go the cinema,” Maria said. “But the trees sound very
interesting and I will learn them all with thee if I can remember them.”
 “They are not as in a museum,” Robert Jordan said. “They grow naturally and there
are hills in the park and part of the park is like a jungle. Then below it there is the book
fair where along the sidewalks there are hundreds of booths with second-hand books in
them and now, since the movement, there are many books, stolen in the looting of the
houses which have been bombed and from the houses of the fascists, and brought to
the book fair by those who stole them. I could spend all day every day at the stalls of the
book fair as I once did in the days before the movement, if I ever could have any time in
Madrid.”
 “While thou art visiting the book fair I will occupy myself with the apartment,” Maria
said. “Will we have enough money for a servant?”
 “Surely. I can get Petra who is at the hotel if she pleases thee. She cooks well and is
clean. I have eaten there with newspapermen that she cooks for. They have electric
stoves in their rooms.”
 “If you wish her,” Maria said. “Or I can find some one. But wilt thou not be away much
with thy work? They would not let me go with thee on such work as this.”
 “Perhaps I can get work in Madrid. I have done this work now for a long time and I
have fought since the start of the movement. It is possible that they would give me work
now in Madrid. I have never asked for it. I have always been at the front or in such work
as this.
 “Do you know that until I met thee I have never asked for anything? Nor wanted
anything? Nor thought of anything except the movement and the winning of this war?
Truly I have been very pure in my ambitions. I have worked much and now I love thee
and,” he said it now in a complete embracing of all that would not be, “I love thee as I
love all that we have fought for. I love thee as I love liberty and dignity and the rights of
all men to work and not be hungry. I love thee as I love Madrid that we have defended
and as I love all my comrades that have died. And many have died. Many. Many. Thou
canst not think how many. But I love thee as I love what I love most in the world and I
love thee more. I love thee very much, rabbit. More than I can tell thee. But I say this
now to tell thee a little. I have never had a wife and now I have thee for a wife and I am
happy.”
 “I will make thee as good a wife as I can,” Maria said. “Clearly I am not well trained but
I will try to make up for that. If we live in Madrid; good. If we must live in any other place;
good. If we live nowhere and I can go with thee; better. If we go to thy country I will learn
to talk Inglés like the most Inglés that there is. I will study all their manners and as they
do so will I do.”
 “Thou wilt be very comic.”
 “Surely. I will make mistakes but you will tell me and I will never make them twice, or
maybe only twice. Then in thy country if thou art lonesome for our food I can cook for
thee. And I will go to a school to learn to be a wife, if there is such a school, and study at
it.”
 “There are such schools but thou dost not need that schooling.”
 “Pilar told me that she thought they existed in your country. She had read of them in a
periodical. And she told me also that I must learn to speak Inglés and to speak it well so
thou wouldst never be ashamed of me.”
 “When did she tell you this?”
 “Today while we were packing. Constantly she talked to me about what I should do to
be thy wife.”
 I guess she was going to Madrid too, Robert Jordan thought, and said, “What else did
she say?”
 “She said I must take care of my body and guard the line of my figure as though I were
a bullfighter. She said this was of great importance.”
 “It is,” Robert Jordan said. “But thou hast not to worry about that for many years.”
 “No. She said those of our race must watch that always as it can come suddenly. She
“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway 188
told me she was once as slender as I but that in those days women did not take
exercise. She told me what exercises I should take and that I must not eat too much.
She told me which things not to eat. But I have forgotten and must ask her again.”
 “Potatoes,” he said.
 “Yes,” she went on. “It was potatoes and things that are fried. Also when I told her
about this of the soreness she said I must not tell thee but must support the pain and not
let thee know. But I told thee because I do not wish to lie to thee ever and also I feared
that thou might think we did not have the joy in common any longer and that other, as it
was in the high country, had not truly happened.”
 “It was right to tell me.”
 “Truly? For I am ashamed and I will do anything for thee that thou should wish. Pilar
has told me of things one can do for a husband.”
 “There is no need to do anything. What we have we have together and we will keep it
and guard it. I love thee thus lying beside thee and touching thee and knowing thou art
truly there and when thou art ready again we will have all.”
 “But hast thou not necessities that I can care for? She explained that to me.”
 “Nay. We will have our necessities together. I have no necessities apart from thee.”
 “That seems much better to me. But understand always that I will do what you wish.
But thou must tell me for I have great ignorance and much of what she told me I did not
understand clearly. For I was ashamed to ask and she is of such great and varied
wisdom.”
 “Rabbit,” he said. “Thou art very wonderful.”
 “Qué va,” she said. “But to try to learn all of that which goes into wifehood in a day
while we are breaking camp and packing for a battle with another battle passing in the
country above is a rare thing and if I make serious mistakes thou must tell me for I love
thee. It could be possible for me to remember things incorrectly and much that she told
me was very complicated.”
 “What else did she tell thee?”
 “Pues so many things I cannot remember them. She said I could tell thee of what was
done to me if I ever began to think of it again because thou art a good man and already
have understood it all. But that it were better never to speak of it unless it came on me
as a black thing as it had been before and then that telling it to thee might rid me of it.”
 “Does it weigh on thee now?”
 “No. It is as though it had never happened since we were first together. There is the
sorrow for my parents always. But that there will be always. But I would have thee know
that which you should know for thy own pride if I am to be thy wife. Never did I submit to
any one. Always I fought and always it took two of them or more to do me the harm.
One would sit on my head and hold me. I tell thee this for thy pride.”
 “My pride is in thee. Do not tell it.”
 “Nay, I speak of thy own pride which it is necessary to have in thy wife. And another
thing. My father was the mayor of the village and an honorable man. My mother was an
honorable woman and a good Catholic and they shot her with my father because of the
politics of my father who was a Republican. I saw both of them shot and my father said,
‘Viva la Republica,’ when they shot him standing against the wall of the slaughterhouse
of our village.
 “My mother standing against the same wall said, ‘Viva my husband who was the
Mayor of this village,’ and I hoped they would shoot me too and I was going to say ‘Viva
la Republica y vivan mis padres,’ but instead there was no shooting but instead the
doing of the things.
 “Listen. I will tell thee of one thing since it affects us. After the shooting at the
matadero they took us, those relatives who had seen it but were not shot, back from the
matadero up the steep hill into the main square of the town. Nearly all were weeping but
some were numb with what they had seen and the tears had dried in them. I myself
could not cry. I did not notice anything that passed for I could only see my father and my
mother at the moment of the shooting and my mother saying, ‘Long live my husband
“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway 189
who was Mayor of this village,’ and this was in my head like a scream that would not die
but kept on and on. For my mother was not a Republican and she would not say, ‘Viva
la Republica,’ but only Viva my father who lay there, on his face, by her feet.
 “But what she had said, she had said very loud, like a shriek and then they shot and
she fell and I tried to leave the line to go to her but we were all tied. The shooting was
done by the guardia civil and they were still there waiting to shoot more when the
Falangists herded us away and up the hill leaving the guardias civiles leaning on their
rifles and leaving all the bodies there against the wall. We were tied by the wrists in a
long line of girls and women and they herded us up by the hill and through the streets to
the square and in the square they stopped in front of the barbershop which was across
the square from the city hail.
 “Then the two men looked at us and one said, ‘That is the daughter of the Mayor,’ and
the other said, ‘Commence with her.’
 “Then they cut the rope that was on each of my wrists, one saying to others of them,
‘Tie up the line,’ and these two took me by the arms and into the barbershop and lifted
me up and put me in the barber’s chair and held me there.
 “I saw my face in the mirror of the barbershop and the faces of those who were
holding me and the faces of three others who were leaning over me and I knew none of
their faces but in the glass I saw myself and them, but they saw only me. And it was as
though one were in the dentist’s chair and there were many dentists and they were all
insane. My own face I could hardly recognize because my grief had changed it but I
looked at it and knew that it was me. But my grief was so great that I had no fear nor
any feeling but my grief.
 “At that time I wore my hair in two braids and as I watched in the mirror one of them
lifted one of the braids and pulled on it so it hurt me suddenly through my grief and then
cut it off close to my head with a razor. And I saw myself with one braid and a slash
where the other had been. Then he cut off the other braid but without pulling on it and
the razor made a small cut on my ear and I saw blood come from it. Canst thou feel the
scar with thy finger?”
 “Yes. But would it be better not to talk of this?”
 “This is nothing. I will not talk of that which is bad. So he had cut both braids close to
my head with a razor and the others laughed and I did not even feel the cut on my ear
and then he stood in front of me and struck me across the face with the braids while the
other two held me and he said, ‘This is how we make Red nuns. This will show thee how
to unite with thy proletarian brothers. Bride of the Red Christ!’
 “And he struck me again and again across the face with the braids which had been
mine and then he put the two of them in my mouth and tied them tight around my neck,
knotting them in the back to make a gag and the two holding me laughed.
 “And all of them who saw it laughed and when I saw them laugh in the mirror I
commenced to cry because until then I had been too frozen in myself from the shooting
to be able to cry.
 “Then the one who had gagged me ran a clippers all over my head; first from the
forehead all the way to the back of the neck and then across the top and then all over
my head and close behind my ears and they held me so I could see into the glass of the
barber’s mirror all the time that they did this and I could not believe it as I saw it done
and I cried and I cried but I could not look away from the horror that my face made with
the mouth open and the braids tied in it and my head coming naked under the clippers.
 “And when the one with the clippers was finished he took a bottle of iodine from the
shelf of the barber (they had shot the barber too for he belonged to a syndicate, and he
lay in the doorway of the shop and they had lifted me over him as they brought me in)
and with the glass wand that is in the iodine bottle he touched me on the ear where it
had been cut and the small pain of that came through my grief and through my horror.
 “Then he stood in front of me and wrote U. H. P. on my forehead with the iodine,
lettering it slowly and carefully as though he were an artist and I saw all of this as it
happened in the mirror and I no longer cried for my heart was frozen in me for my father
“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway 190
and my mother and what happened to me now was nothing and I knew it.
 “Then when he had finished the lettering, the Falangist stepped back and looked at
me to examine his work and then he put down the iodine bottle and picked up the
clippers and said, ‘Next,’ and they took me out of the barbershop holding me tight by
each arm and I stumbled over the barber lying there still in the doorway on his back with
his gray face up, and we nearly collided with Concepción GracIa, my best friend, that
two of them were bringing in and when she saw me she did not recognize me, and then
she recognized me, and she screamed, and I could hear her screaming all the time they
were shoving me across the square, and into the doorway, and up the stairs of the city
hall and into the office of my father where they laid me onto the couch. And it was there
that the bad things were done.”
 “My rabbit,” Robert Jordan said and held her as close and as gently as he could. But
he was as full of hate as any man could be. “Do not talk more about it. Do not tell me
any more for I cannot bear my hatred now.”
 She was stiff and cold in his arms and she said, “Nay. I will never talk more of it. But
they are bad people and I would like to kill some of them with thee if I could. But I have
told thee this only for thy pride if I am to be thy wife. So thou wouldst understand.”
 “I am glad you told me,” he said. “For tomorrow, with luck, we will kill plenty.”
 “But will we kill Falangists? It was they who did it.”
 “They do not fight,” he said gloomily. “They kill at the rear. It is not them we fight in
battle.”
 “But can we not kill them in some way? I would like to kill some very much.”
 “I have killed them,” he said. “And we will kill them again. At the trains we have killed
them.”
 “I would like to go for a train with thee,” Maria said. “The time of the train that Pilar
brought me back from I was somewhat crazy. Did she tell thee how I was?”
 “Yes. Do not talk of it.”
 “I was dead in my head with a numbness and all I could do was cry. But there is
another thing that I must tell thee. This I must. Then perhaps thou wilt not marry me.
But, Roberto, if thou should not wish to marry me, can we not, then, just be always
together?”
 “I will marry thee.”
 “Nay. I had forgotten this. Perhaps you should not. It is possible that I can never bear
thee either a son or a daughter for the Pilar says that if I could it would have happened
to me with the things which were done. I must tell thee that. Oh, I do not know why I had
forgotten that.”
 “It is of no importance, rabbit,” he said. “First it may not be true. That is for a doctor to
say. Then I would not wish to bring either a son or a daughter into this world as this
world is. And also you take all the love I have to give.”
 “I would like to bear thy son and thy daughter,” she told him. “And how can the world
be made better if there are no children of us who fight against the fascists?”
 “Thou,” he said. “I love thee. Hearest thou? And now we must sleep, rabbit. For I must
be up long before daylight and the dawn comes early in this month.”
 “Then it is all right about the last thing I said? We can still be married?”
 “We are married, now. I marry thee now. Thou art my wife. But go to sleep, my rabbit,
for there is little time now.”
 “And we will truly be married? Not just a talking?”
 “Truly.”
 “Then I will sleep and think of that if I wake.”
 “I, too.”
 “Good night, my husband.”
 “Good night,” he said. “Good night, wife.”
 He heard her breathing steadily and regularly now and he knew she was asleep and
he lay awake and very still not wanting to waken her by moving. He thought of all the
part she had not told him and he lay there hating and he was pleased there would be
“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway 191
killing in the morning. But I must not take any of it personally, he thought.
 Though how can I keep from it? I know that we did dreadful things to them too. But it
was because we were uneducated and knew no better. But they did that on purpose
and deliberately. Those who did that are the last flowering of what their education has
produced. Those are the flowers of Spanish chivalry. What a people they have been.
What sons of bitches from Cortez, Pizarro, Menéndez de Avila all down through Enrique
Lister to Pablo. And what wonderful people. There is no finer and no worse people in the
world. No kinder people and no crueler. And who understands them? Not me, because if
I did I would forgive it all. To understand is to forgive. That’s not true. Forgiveness has
been exaggerated. Forgiveness is a Christian idea and Spain has never been a
Christian country. It has always had its own special idol worship within the Church. Otra
Virgen más. I suppose that was why they had to destroy the virgins of their enemies.
Surely it was deeper with them, with the Spanish religion fanatics, than it was with the
people. The people had grown away from the Church because the Church was in the
government and the government had always been rotten. This was the only country that
the reformation never reached. They were paying for the Inquisition now, all right.
 Well, it was something to think about. Something to keep your mind from worrying
about your work. It was sounder than pretending. God, he had done a lot of pretending
tonight. And Pilar had been pretending all day. Sure. What if they were killed tomorrow?
What did it matter as long as they did the bridge properly? That was all they had to do
tomorrow.
 It didn’t. You couldn’t do these things indefinitely. But you weren’t supposed to live
forever. Maybe I have had all my life in three days, he thought. If that’s true I wish we
would have spent the last night differently. But last nights are never any good. Last
nothings are any good. Yes, last words were good sometimes. “Viva my husband who
was Mayor of this town” was good.
 He knew it was good because it made a tingle run all over him when he said it to
himself. He leaned over and kissed Maria who did not wake. In English he whispered
very quietly, “I’d like to marry you, rabbit. I’m very proud of your family.”
32
 On that same night in Madrid there were many people at the Hotel Gaylord. A car
pulled up under the porte-cochere of the hotel, its headlights painted over with blue
calcimine and a little man in black riding boots, gray riding breeches and a short, gray
high-buttoned jacket stepped out and returned the salute of the two sentries as he
opened the door, nodded to the secret policeman who sat at the concierge’s desk and
stepped into the elevator. There were two sentries seated on chairs inside the door, one
on each side of the marble entrance hall, and these only looked up as the little man
passed them at the door of the elevator. It was their business to feel every one they did
not know along the flanks, under the armpits, and over the hip pockets to see if the
person entering carried a pistol and, if he did, have him check it with the concierge. But
they knew the short man in riding boots very well and they hardly looked up as he
passed.
 The apartment where he lived in Gaylord’s was crowded as he entered. People were
sitting and standing about and talking together as in any drawing room and the men and
the women were drinking vodka, whiskey and soda, and beer from small glasses filled
from great pitchers. Four of the men were in uniform. The others wore windbreakers or
leather jackets.and three of the four women were dressed in ordinary street dresses
while the fourth, who was haggardly thin and dark, wore a sort of severely cut
militiawoman’s uniform with a skirt with high boots under it.
 When he came into the room, Karkov went at once to the woman in the uniform and
bowed to her and shook hands. She was his wife and he said something to her in
Russian that no one could hear and for a moment the insolence that had been in his
eyes as he entered the room was gone. Then it lighted again as he saw the
“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway 192
mahoganycolored head and the love-lazy face of the well-constructed girl who was his
mistress and he strode with short, precise steps over to her and bowed and shook her
hand in such a way that no one could tell it was not a mimicry of his greeting to his wife.
His wife had not looked after him as he walked across the room. She was standing with
a tall, good-looking Spanish officer and they were talking Russian now.
 “Your great love is getting a little fat,” Karkov was saying to the girl. “All of our heroes
are fattening now as we approach the second year.” He did not look at the man he was
speaking of.
 “You are so ugly you would be jealous of a toad,” the girl told him cheerfully. She
spoke in German. “Can I go with thee to the offensive tomorrow?”
 “No. Nor is there one.”
 “Every one knows about it,” the girl said. “Don’t be so mysterious. Dolores is going. I
will go with her or Carmen. Many people are going.”
 “Go with whoever will take you,” Karkov said. “I will not.”
 Then he turned to the girl and asked seriously, “Who told thee of it? Be exact.”
 “Richard,” she said as seriously.
 Karkov shrugged his shoulders and left her standing.
 “Karkov,” a man of middle height with a gray, heavy, sagging face, puffed eye
pouches and a pendulous under-lip called to him in a dyspeptic voice. “Have you heard
the good news?”
 Karkov went over to him and the man said, “I only have it now. Not ten minutes ago. It
is wonderful. All day the fascists have been fighting among themselves near Segovia.
They have been forced to quell the mutinies with automatic rifle and machine-gun fire. In
the afternoon they were bombing their own troops with planes.”
 “Yes?” asked Karkov.
 “That is true,” the puffy-eyed man said. “Dolores brought the news herself. She was
here with the news and was in such a state of radiant exultation as I have never seen.
The truth of the news shone from her face. That great face—” he said happily.
 “That great face,” Karkov said with no tone in his voice at all.
 “If you could have heard her,” the puffy-eyed man said. “The news itself shone from
her with a light that was not of this world. In her voice you could tell the truth of what she
said. I am putting it in an article for Izvestia. It was one of the greatest moments of the
war to me when I heard the report in that great voice where pity, compassion and truth
are blended. Goodness and truth shine from her as from a true saint of the people. Not
for nothing is she called La Pasionaria.”
 “Not for nothing,” Karkov said in a dull voice. “You better write it for Izvestia now,
before you forget that last beautiful lead.”
 “That is a woman that is not to joke about. Not even by a cynic like you,” the puffyeyed man said. “If you could have been here to hear her and to see her face.”
 “That great voice,” Karkov said. “That great face. Write it,” he said. “Don’t tell it to me.
Don’t waste whole paragraphs on me. Go and write it now.”
 “Not just now.”
 “I think you’d better,” Karkov said and looked at him, and then looked away. The puffyeyed man stood there a couple of minutes more holding his glass of vodka, his eyes,
puffy as they were, absorbed in the beauty of what he had seen and heard and then he
left the room to write it.
 Karkov went over to another man of about forty-eight, who was short, chunky, joviallooking with pale blue eyes, thinning blond hair and a gay mouth under a bristly yellow
moustache. This man was in uniform. He was a divisional commander and he was a
Hungarian.
 “Were you here when the Dolores was here?” Karkov asked the man.
 “Yes.”
 “What was the stuff?”
 “Something about the fascists fighting among themselves. Beautiful if true.”
 “You hear much talk of tomorrow.”
“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway 193
 “Scandalous. All the journalists should be shot as well as most of the people in this
room and certainly the intriguing German unmentionable of a Richard. Whoever gave
that Sunday fuggler command of a brigade should be shot. Perhaps you and me should
be shot too. It is possible,” the General laughed. “Don’t suggest it though.”
 “That is a thing I never like to talk about,” Karkov said. “That American who comes
here sometimes is over there. You know the one, Jordan, who is with the partizan
group. He is there where this business they spoke of is supposed to happen.”
 “Well, he should have a report through on it tonight then,” the General said. “They
don’t like me down there or I’d go down and find out for you. He works with Golz on this,
doesn’t he? You’ll see Golz tomorrow.”
 “Early tomorrow.”
 “Keep out of his way until it’s going well,” the General said. “He hates you bastards as
much as I do. Though he has a much better temper.”
 “But about this—”
 “It was probably the fascists having manoeuvres,” the General grinned. “Well, we’ll
see if Golz can manceuvre them a little. Let Golz try his hand at it. We manoeuvred
them at Guadalajara.”
 “I hear you are travelling too,” Karkov said, showing his bad teeth as he smiled. The
General was suddenly angry.
 “And me too. Now is the mouth on me. And on all of us always. This filthy sewing
circle of gossip. One man who could keep his mouth shut could save the country if he
believed he could.”
 “Your friend Prieto can keep his mouth shut.”
 “But he doesn’t believe he can win. How can you win without belief in the people?”
 “You decide that,” Karkov said. “I am going to get a little sleep.”
 He left the smoky, gossip-filled room and went into the back bedroom and sat down on
the bed and pulled his boots off. He could still hear them talking so he shut the door and
opened the window. He did not bother to undress because at two o’clock he would be
starting for the drive by Colmenar, Cerceda, and Navacerrada up to the front where
Golz would be attacking in the morning.
33
 It was two o’clock in the morning when Pilar waked him. As her hand touched him he
thought, at first, it was Maria and he rolled toward her and said, “Rabbit.” Then the
woman’s big hand shook his shoulder and he was suddenly, completely and absolutely
awake and his hand was around the butt of the pistol that lay alongside of his bare right
leg and all of him was as cocked as the pistol with its safety catch slipped off.
 In the dark he saw it was Pilar and he looked at the dial of his wrist watch with the two
hands shining in the short angle close to the top and seeing it was only two, he said,
“What passes with thee, woman?”
 “Pablo is gone,” the big woman said to him.
 Robert Jordan put on his trousers and shoes. Maria had not waked.
 “When?” he asked.
 “It must be an hour.”
 “And?”
 “He has taken something of thine,” the woman said miserably.
 “So. What?”
 “I do not know,” she told him. “Come and see.”
 In the dark they walked over to the entrance of the cave, ducked under the blanket
and went in. Robert Jordan followed her in the dead-ashes, bad-air and sleeping-men
smell of the cave, shining his electric torch so that he would not step on any of those
who were sleeping on the floor. Anselmo woke and said, “Is it time?”
 “No,” Robert Jordan whispered. “Sleep, old one.”
 The two sacks were at the head of Pilar’s bed which was screened off with a hanging
“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway 194
blanket from the rest of the cave. The bed smelt stale and sweat-dried and sickly-sweet
the way an Indian’s bed does as Robert Jordan knelt on it and shone the torch on the
two sacks. There was a long slit from top to bottom in each one. Holding the torch in his
left hand, Robert Jordan felt in the first sack with his right hand. This was the one that he
carried his robe in and it should not be very full. It was not very full. There was some
wire in it still but the square wooden box of the exploder was gone. So was the cigar box
with the carefully wrapped and packed detonators. So was the screw-top tin with the
fuse and the caps.
 Robert Jordan felt in the other sack. It was still full of explosive. There might be one
packet missing.
 He stood up and turned to the woman. There is a hollow empty feeling that a man can
have when he is waked too early in the morning that is almost like the feeling of disaster
and he had this multiplied a thousand times.
 “And this is what you call guarding one’s materials,” he said.
 “I slept with my head against them and one arm touching them,” Pilar told him.
 “You slept well.”
 “Listen,” the woman said. “He got up in the night and I said, ‘Where do you go, Pablo?’
‘To urinate, woman,’ he told me and I slept again. When I woke again I did not know
what time had passed but I thought, when he was not there, that he had gone down to
look at the horses as was his custom. Then,” she finished miserably, “when he did not
come I worried and when I worried I felt of the sacks to be sure all was well and there
were the slit places and I came to thee.”
 “Come on,” Robert Jordan said.
 They were outside now and it was still so near the middle of the night that you could
not feel the morning coming.
 “Can he get out with the horses other ways than by the sentry?”
 “Two ways.”
 “Who’s at the top?”
 “Eladio.”
 Robert Jordan said nothing more until they reached the meadow where the horses
were staked out to feed. There were three horses feeding in the meadow. The big bay
and the gray were gone.
 “How long ago do you think it was he left you?”
 “It must have been an hour.”
 “Then that is that,” Robert Jordan said. “I go to get what is left of my sacks and go
back to bed.”
 “I will guard them.”
 “Qué va, you will guard them. You’ve guarded them once already.”
 “Inglés,” the woman said, “I feel in regard to this as you do. There is nothing I would
not do to bring back thy property. You have no need to hurt me. We have both been
betrayed by Pablo.”
 As she said this Robert Jordan realized that he could not afford the luxury of being
bitter, that he could not quarrel with this woman. He had to work with this woman on that
day that was already two hours and more gone.
 He put his hand on her shoulder. “It is nothing, Pilar,” he told her. “What is gone is of
small importance. We shall improvise something that will do as well.”
 “But what did he take?”
 “Nothing, woman. Some luxuries that one permits oneself.”
 “Was it part of thy mechanism for the exploding?”
 “Yes. But there are other ways to do the exploding. Tell me, did Pablo not have caps
and fuse? Surely they would have equipped him with those?”
 “He has taken them,” she said miserably. “I looked at once for them. They are gone,
too.”
 They walked back through the woods to the entrance of the cave.
 “Get some sleep,” he said. “We are better off with Pablo gone.”
“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway 195
 “I go to see Eladio.”
 “He will have gone another way.”
 “I go anyway. I have betrayed thee with my lack of smartness.”
 “Nay,” he said. “Get some sleep, woman. We must be under way at four.”
 He went into the cave with her and brought out the two sacks, carrying them held
together in both arms so that nothing could spill from the slits.
 “Let me sew them up.”
 “Before we start,” he said softly. “I take them not against you but so that I can sleep.”
 “I must have them early to sew them.”
 “You shall have them early,” he told her. “Get some sleep, woman.”
 “Nay,” she said. “I have failed thee and I have failed the Republic.”
 “Get thee some sleep, woman,” he told her gently. “Get thee some sleep.”
34
 The fascists held the crests of the hills here. Then there was a valley that no one held
except for a fascist post in a farmhouse with its outbuildings and its barn that they had
fortified. Andrés, on his way to Golz with the message from Robert Jordan, made a wide
circle around this post in the dark. He knew where there was a trip wire laid that fired a
set-gun and he located it in the dark, stepped over it, and started along the small stream
bordered with poplars whose leaves were moving with the night wind. A cock crowed at
the farmhouse that was the fascist post and as he walked along the stream he looked
back and saw, through the trunks of the poplars, a light showing at the lower edge of
one of the windows of the farmhouse. The night was quiet and clear and Andrés left the
stream and struck across the meadow.
 There were four haycocks in the meadow that had stood there ever since the fighting
in July of the year before. No one had ever carried the hay away and the four seasons
that had passed had flattened the cocks and made the hay worthless.
 Andrés thought what a waste it was as he stepped over a trip wire that ran between
two of the haycocks. But the Republicans would have had to carry the hay up the steep
Guadarrama slope that rose beyond the meadow and the fascists did not need it, I
suppose, he thought.
 They have all the hay they need and all the grain. They have much, he thought. But
we will give them a blow tomorrow morning. Tomorrow morning we will give them
something for Sordo. What barbarians they are! But in the morning there will be dust on
the road.
 He wanted to get this message-taking over and be back for the attack on the posts in
the morning. Did he really want to get back though or did he only pretend he wanted to
be back? He knew the reprieved feeling he had felt when the Inglés had told him he was
to go with the message. He had faced the prospect of the morning calmly. It was what
was to be done. He had voted for it and would do it. The wiping out of Sordo had
impressed him deeply. But, after all, that was Sordo. That was not them. What they had
to do they would do.
 But when the Inglés had spoken to him of the message he had felt the way he used to
feel when he was a boy and he had wakened in the morning of the festival of his village
and heard it raining hard so that he knew that it would be too wet and that the bullbaiting
in the square would be cancelled.
 He loved the bullbaiting when he was a boy and he looked forward to it and to the
moment when he would be in the square in the hot sun and the dust with the carts
ranged all around to close the exits and to make a closed place into which the bull would
come, sliding down out of his box, braking with all four feet, when they pulled the endgate up. He looked forward with excitement, delight and sweating fear to the moment
when, in the square, he would hear the clatter of the bull’s horns knocking against the
wood of his travelling box, and then the sight of him as he came, sliding, braking out into
the square, his head up, his nostrils wide, his ears twitching, dust in the sheen of his
“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway 196
black hide, dried crut splashed on his flanks, watching his eyes set wide apart,
unblinking eyes under the widespread horns as smooth and solid as driftwood polished
by the sand, the sharp tips uptilted so that to see them did something to your heart.
 He looked forward all the year to that moment when the bull would come out into the
square on that day when you watched his eyes while he made his choice of whom in the
square he would attack in that sudden head-lowering, horn-reaching, quick catgallop
that stopped your heart dead when it started. He had looked forward to that moment all
the year when he was a boy; but the feeling when the Inglés gave the order about the
message was the same as when you woke to hear the reprieve of the rain falling on the
slate roof, against the stone wall and into the puddles on the dirt Street of the village.
 He had always been very brave with the bull in those village capeas, as brave as any
in the village or of the other near-by villages, and not for anything would he have missed
it any year although he did not go to the capeas of other villages. He was able to wait
still when the bull charged and only jumped aside at the last moment. He waved a sack
under his muzzle to draw him off when the bull had some one down and many times he
had held and pulled on the horns when the bull had some one on the ground and pulled
sideways on the horn, had slapped and kicked him in the face until he left the man to
charge some one else.
 He had held the bull’s tail to pull him away from a fallen man, bracing hard and pulling
and twisting. Once he had pulled the tail around with one hand until he could reach a
horn with the other and when the bull had lifted his head to charge him he had run
backwards, circling with the bull, holding the tail in one hand and the horn in the other
until the crowd had swarmed onto the bull with their knives and stabbed him. In the dust
and the heat, the shouting, the bull and man and wine smell, he had been in the first of
the crowd that threw themselves onto the bull and he knew the feeling when the bull
rocked and bucked under him and he lay across the withers with one arm locked around
the base of the horn and his hand holding the other horn tight, his fingers locked as his
body tossed and wrenched and his left arm felt as though it would tear from the socket
while he lay on the hot, dusty, bristly, tossing slope of muscle, the ear clenched tight in
his teeth, and drove his knife again and again and again into the swelling, tossing bulge
of the neck that was now spouting hot on his fist as he let his weight hang on the high
slope of the withers and banged and banged into the neck.
 The first time he had bit the ear like that and held onto it, his neck and jaws stiffened
against the tossing, they had all made fun of him afterwards. But though they joked him
about it they had great respect for him. And every year after that he had to repeat it.
They called him the bulldog of Villaconejos and joked about him eating cattle raw. But
every one in the village looked forward to seeing him do it and every year he knew that
first the bull would come out, then there would be the charges and the tossing, and then
when they yelled for the rush for the killing he would place himself to rush through the
other attackers and leap for his hold. Then, when it was over, and the bull settled and
sunk dead finally under the weight of the killers, he would stand up and walk away
ashamed of the ear part, but also as proud as a man could be. And he would go through
the carts to wash his hands at the stone fountain and men would clap him on the back
and hand him wineskins and say, “Hurray for you, Bulldog. Long life to your mother.”
 Or they would say, “That’s what it is to have a pair of cojones! Year after year!”
 Andrés would be ashamed, empty-feeling, proud and happy, and he would shake
them all off and wash his hands and his right arm and wash his knife well and then take
one of the wineskins and rinse the ear-taste out of his mouth for that year; spitting the
wine on the stone flags of the plaza before he lifted the wineskin high and let the wine
spurt into the back of his mouth.
 Surely. He was the Bulldog of Villaconejos and not for anything would he have missed
doing it each year in his village. But he knew there was no better feeling than that one
the sound of the rain gave when he knew he would not have to do it.
 But I must go back, he told himself. There is no question but that I must go back for
the affair of the posts and the bridge. My brother Eladio is there, who is of my own bone
“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway 197
and flesh. Anselmo, Primitivo, Fernando, Agustín, Rafael, though clearly he is not
serious, the two women, Pablo and the Inglés, though the Inglés does not count since
he is a foreigner and under orders. They are all in for it. It is impossible that I should
escape this proving through the accident of a message. I must deliver this message now
quickly and well and then make all haste to return in time for the assault on the posts. It
would be ignoble of me not to participate in this action because of the accident of this
message. That could not be clearer. And besides, he told himself, as one who suddenly
remembers that there will be pleasure too in an engagement only the onerous aspects
of which he has been considering, and besides I will enjoy the killing of some fascists. It
has been too long since we have destroyed any. Tomorrow can be a day of much valid
action. Tomorrow can be a day of concrete acts. Tomorrow can be a day which is worth
something. That tomorrow should come and that I should be there.
 Just then, as knee deep in the gorse he climbed the steep slope that led to the
Republican lines, a partridge flew up from under his feet, exploding in a whirr of
wingbeats in the dark and he felt a sudden breath-stopping fright. It is the suddenness,
he thought. How can they move their wings that fast? She must be nesting now. I
probably trod close to the eggs. If there were not this war I would tie a handkerchief to
the bush and come back in the daytime and search out the nest and I could take the
eggs and put them under a setting hen and when they hatched we would have little
partridges in the poultry yard and I would watch them grow and, when they were grown,
I’d use them for callers. I wouldn’t blind them because they would be tame. Or do you
suppose they would fly off? Probably. Then I would have to blind them.
 But I don’t like to do that after I have raised them. I could clip the wings or tether them
by one leg when I used them for calling. If there was no war I would go with Eladio to get
crayfish from that stream back there by the fascist post. One time we got four dozen
from that stream in a day. If we go to the Sierra de Gredos after this of the bridge there
are fine streams there for trout and for crayfish also. I hope we go to Gredos, he
thought. We could make a good life in Gredos in the summer time and in the fall but it
would be terribly cold in winter. But by winter maybe we will have won the war.
 If our father had not been a Republican both Eladio and I would be soldiers now with
the fascists and if one were a soldier with them then there would be no problem. One
would obey orders and one would live or die and in the end it would be however it would
be. It was easier to live under a regime than to fight it.
 But this irregular fighting was a thing of much responsibility. There was much worry if
you were one to worry. Eladio thinks more than I do. Also he worries. I believe truly in
the cause and I do not worry. But it is a life of much responsibility.
 I think that we are born into a time of great difficulty, he thought. I think any other time
was probably easier. One suffers little because all of us have been formed to resist
suffering. They who suffer are unsuited to this climate. But it is a time of difficult
decisions. The fascists attacked and made our decision for us. We fight to live. But I
would like to have it so that I could tie a handkerchief to that bush back there and come
in the daylight and take the eggs and put them under a hen and be able to see the
chicks of the partridge in my own courtyard. I would like such small and regular things.
 But you have no house and no courtyard in your no-house, he thought. You have no
family but a brother who goes to battle tomorrow and you own nothing but the wind and
the sun and an empty belly. The wind is small, he thought, and there is no sun. You
have four grenades in your pocket but they are only good to throw away. You have a
carbine on your back but it is only good to give away bullets. You have a message to
give away. And you’re full of crap that you can give to the earth, he grinned in the dark.
You can anoint it also with urine. Everything you have is to give. Thou art a
phenomenon of philosophy and an unfortunate man, he told himself and grinned again.
 But for all his noble thinking a little while before there was in him that reprieved feeling
that had always come with the sound of rain in the village on the morning of the fiesta.
Ahead of him now at the top of the ridge was the government position where he knew
he would be challenged.
“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway 198
35
 Robert Jordan lay in the robe beside the girl Maria who was still sleeping. He lay on
his side turned away from the girl and he felt her long body against his back and the
touch of it now was just an irony. You, you, he raged at himself. Yes, you. You told
yourself the first time you saw him that when he would be friendly would be when the
treachery would come. You damned fool. You utter blasted damned fool. Chuck all that.
That’s not what you have to do now.
 What are the chances that he hid them or threw them away? Not so good. Besides
you’d never find them in the dark. He would have kept them. He took some dynamite,
too. Oh, the dirty, vile, treacherous sod. The dirty rotten crut. Why couldn’t he have just
mucked off and not have taken the exploder and the detonators? Why was I such an
utter goddamned fool as to leave them with that bloody woman? The smart, treacherous
ugly bastard. The dirty cabrón.
 Cut it out and take it easy, he told himself. You had to take chances and that was the
best there was. You’re just mucked, he told himself. You’re mucked for good and higher
than a kite. Keep your damned head and get the anger out and stop this cheap
lamenting like a damned wailing wall. It’s gone. God damn you, it’s gone. Oh damn the
dirty swine to hell. You can muck your way out of it. You’ve got to, you know you’ve got
to blow it if you have to stand there and—cut Out that stuff, too. Why don’t you ask your
grandfather?
 Oh, muck my grandfather and muck this whole treacherous muckfaced mucking
country and every mucking Spaniard in it on either side and to hell forever. Muck them
to hell together, Largo, Prieto, Asensio, Miaja, Rojo, all of them. Muck every one of them
to death to hell. Muck the whole treachery-ridden country. Muck their egotism and their
selfishness and their selfishness and their egotism and their conceit and their treachery.
Muck them to hell and always. Muck them before we die for them. Muck them after we
die for them. Muck them to death and hell. God muck Pablo. Pablo is all of them. God
pity the Spanish people. Any leader they have will muck them. One good man, Pablo
Iglesias, in two thousand years and everybody else mucking them. How do we know
how he would have stood up in this war? I remember when I thought Largo was O.K.
Durruti was good and his own people shot him there at the Puente de los Franceses.
Shot him because he wanted them to attack. Shot him in the glorious discipline of
indiscipline. The cowardly swine. Oh muck them all to hell and be damned. And that
Pablo that just mucked off with my exploder and my box of detonators. Oh muck him to
deepest hell. But no. He’s mucked us instead. They always muck you instead, from
Cortez and Menendez de Avila down to Miaja. Look at what Miaja did to Kleber. The
bald egotistical swine. The stupid egg-headed bastard. Muck all the insane, egotistical,
treacherous swine that have always governed Spain and ruled her armies. Muck
everybody but the people and then be damned careful what they turn into when they
have power.
 His rage began to thin as he exaggerated more and more and spread his scorn and
contempt so widely and unjustly that he could no longer believe in it himself. If that were
true what are you here for? It’s not true and you know it. Look at all the good ones. Look
at all the fine ones. He could not bear to be unjust. He hated injustice as he hated
cruelty and he lay in his rage that blinded his mind until gradually the anger died down
and the red, black, blinding, killing anger was all gone and his mind now as quiet,
empty-calm and sharp, cold-seeing as a man is after he has had sexual intercourse with
a woman that he does not love.
 “And you, you poor rabbit,” he leaned over and said to Maria, who smiled in her sleep
and moved close against him. “I would have struck thee there awhile back if thou had
spoken. What an animal a man is in a rage.”
 He lay close to the girl now with his arms around her and his chin on her shoulder and
lying there he figured out exactly what he would have to do and how he would have to
do it.
“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway 199
 And it isn’t so bad, he thought. It really isn’t so bad at all. I don’t know whether any one
has ever done it before. But there will always be people who will do it from now on,
given a similar jam. If we do it and if they hear about it. If they hear about it, yes. If they
do not just wonder how it was we did it. We are too short of people but there is no sense
to worry about that. I will do the bridge with what we have. God, I’m glad I got over being
angry. It was like not being able to breathe in a storm. That being angry is another
damned luxury you can’t afford.
 “It’s all figured out, guapa,” he said softly against Maria’s shoulder. “You haven’t been
bothered by any of it. You have not known about it. We’ll be killed but we’ll blow the
bridge. You have not had to worry about it. That isn’t much of a wedding present. But is
not a good night’s sleep supposed to be priceless? You had a good night’s sleep. See if
you can wear that like a ring on your finger. Sleep, guapa. Sleep well, my beloved. I do
not wake thee. That is all I can do for thee now.”
 He lay there holding her very lightly, feeling her breathe and feeling her heart beat,
and keeping track of the time on his wrist watch.
36
 Andrés had challenged at the government position. That is, he had lain down where
the ground fell sharply away below the triple belt of wire and shouted up at the rock and
earth parapet. There was no continual defensive line and he could easily have passed
this position in the dark and made his way farther into the government territory before
running into some one who would challenge him. But it seemed safer and simpler to get
it over here.
 “Salud!” he had shouted. “Salud, milicianos!”
 He heard a bolt snick as it was pulled back. Then, from farther down the parapet, a
rifle fired. There was a crashing crack and a downward stab of yellow in the dark.
Andrés had flattened at the click, the top of his head hard against the ground.
 “Don’t shoot, Comrades,” Andrés shouted. “Don’t shoot! I want to come in.”
 “How many are you?” some one called from behind the parapet.
 “One. Me. Alone.”
 “Who are you?”
 “Andrés Lopez of Villaconejos. From the band of Pablo. With a message.”
 “Have you your rifle and equipment?”
 “Yes, man.”
 “We can take in none without rifle and equipment,” the voice said. “Nor in larger
groups than three.”
 “I am alone,” Andrés shouted. “It is important. Let me come in.”
 He could hear them talking behind the parapet but not what they were saying. Then
the voice shouted again, “How many are you?”
 “One. Me. Alone. For the love of God.”
 They were talking behind the parapet again. Then the voice came, “Listen, fascist.”
 “I am not a fascist,” Andrés shouted. “I am a guerrillero from the band of Pablo. I come
with a message for the General Staff.”
 “He’s crazy,” he heard some one say. “Toss a bomb at him.”
 “Listen,” Andrés said. “I am alone. I am completely by myself. I obscenity in the midst
of the holy mysteries that I am alone. Let me come in.”
 “He speaks like a Christian,” he heard some one say and laugh.
 Then some one else said, “The best thing is to toss a bomb down on him.”
 “No,” Andrés shouted. “That would be a great mistake. This is important. Let me come
in.”
 It was for this reason that he had never enjoyed trips back and forth between the lines.
Sometimes it was better than others. But it was never good.
 “You are alone?” the voice called down again.
 “Me cago en la leche,” Andrés shouted. “How many times must I tell thee? I AM
“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway 200
ALONE.”
 “Then if you should be alone stand up and hold thy rifle over thy head.”
 Andrés stood up and put the carbine above his head, holding it in both hands.
 “Now come through the wire. We have thee covered with the máquina,” the voice
called.
 Andrés was in the first zigzag belt of wire. “I need my hands to get through the wire,”
he shouted.
 “Keep them up,” the voice commanded.
 “I am held fast by the wire,” Andrés called.
 “It would have been simpler to have thrown a bomb at him,” a voice said.
 “Let him sling his rifle,” another voice said. “He cannot come through there with his
hands above his head. Use a little reason.”
 “All these fascists are the same,” the other voice said. “They demand one condition
after another.”
 “Listen,” Andrés shouted. “I am no fascist but a guerrillero from the band of Pablo.
We’ve killed more fascists than the typhus.”
 “I have never heard of the band of Pablo,” the man who was evidently in command of
the post said. “Neither of Peter nor of Paul nor of any of the other saints nor apostles.
Nor of their bands. Sling thy rifle over thy shoulder and use thy hands to come through
the wire.”
 “Before we loose the máquina on thee,” another shouted.
 “Qué poco amables sois!” Andrés said. “You’re not very amiable.”
 He was working his way through the wire.
 “Amables,” some one shouted at him. “We are in a war, man.”
 “It begins to appear so,” Andrés said.
 “What’s he say?”
 Andrés heard a bolt click again.
 “Nothing,” he shouted. “I say nothing. Do not shoot until I get through this fornicating
wire.”
 “Don’t speak badly of our wire,” some one shouted. “Or we’ll toss a bomb on you.”
 “Quiero decir, qué buena alambrada,” Andrés shouted. “What beautiful wire. God in a
latrine. What lovely wire. Soon I will be with thee, brothers.”
 “Throw a bomb at him,” he heard the one voice say. “I tell you that’s the soundest way
to deal with the whole thing.”
 “Brothers,” Andrés said. He was wet through with sweat and he knew the bomb
advocate was perfectly capable of tossing a grenade at any moment. “I have no
importance.”
 “I believe it,” the bomb man said.
 “You are right,” Andrés said. He was working carefully through the third belt of wire
and he was very close to the parapet. “I have no importance of any kind. But the affair is
serious. Muy, muy serio.”
 “There is no more serious thing than liberty,” the bomb man shouted. “Thou thinkest
there is anything more serious than liberty?” he asked challengingly.
 “No, man,” Andrés said, relieved. He knew now he was up against the crazies; the
ones with the black-and-red scarves. “Viva la Libertad!”
 “Viva la F. A. I. Viva la C.N.T.,” they shouted back at him from the parapet. “Viva el
anarco-sindicalismo and liberty.”
 “Viva nosotros,” Andrés shouted. “Long life to us.”
 “He is a coreligionary of ours,” the bomb man said. “And I might have killed him with
this.”
 He looked at the grenade in his hand and was deeply moved as Andrés climbed over
the parapet. Putting his arms around him, the grenade still in one hand, so that it rested
against Andrés’s shoulder blade as he embraced him, the bomb man kissed him on
both cheeks.
 “I am content that nothing happened to thee, brother,” he said. “I am very content.”
“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway 201
 “Where is thy officer?” Andrés asked.
 “I command here,” a man said. “Let me see thy papers.”
 He took them into a dugout and looked at them with the light of a candle. There was
the little square of folded silk with the colors of the Republic and the seal of the S. I. M.
in the center. There was the Salvoconducto or safe-conduct pass giving his name, age,
height, birthplace and mission that Robert Jordan had written out on a sheet from his
notebook and sealed with the S. I. M. rubber stamp and there were the four folded
sheets of the dispatch to Golz which were tied around with a cord and sealed with wax
and the impression of the metal S. I. M. seal that was set in the top end of the wooden
handle of the rubber stamp.
 “This I have seen,” the man in command of the post said and handed back the piece
of silk. “This you all have, I know. But its possession proves nothing without this.” He
lifted the Salvoconducto and read it through again. “Where were you born?”
 “Villaconejos,” Andrés said.
 “And what do they raise there?”
 “Melons,” Andrés said. “As all the world knows.”
 “Who do you know there?”
 “Why? Are you from there?”
 “Nay. But I have been there. I am from Aranjuëz.”
 “Ask me about any one.”
 “Describe José Rincon.”
 “Who keeps the bodega?”
 “Naturally.”
 “With a shaved head and a big belly and a cast in one eye.”
 “Then this is valid,” the man said and handed him back the paper. “But what do you do
on their side?”
 “Our father had installed himself at Villacastín before the movement,” Andrés said.
“Down there beyond the mountains on the plain. It was there we were surprised by the
movement. Since the movement I have fought with the band of Pablo. But I am in a
great hurry, man, to take that dispatch.”
 “How goes it in the country of the fascists?” the man commanding asked. He was in
no hurry.
 “Today we had much tomate,” Andrés said proudly. “Today there was plenty of dust
on the road all day. Today they wiped out the band of Sordo.”
 “And who is Sordo?” the other asked deprecatingly.
 “The leader of one of the best bands in the mountains.”
 “All of you should come in to the Republic and join the army,” the officer said. “There is
too much of this silly guerilla nonsense going on. All of you should come in and submit
to our Libertarian discipline. Then when we wished to send out guerillas we would send
them out as they are needed.”
 Andrés was a man endowed with almost supreme patience. He had taken the coming
in through the wire calmly. None of this examination had flustered him. He found it
perfectly normal that this man should have no understanding of them nor of what they
were doing and that he should talk idiocy was to be expected. That it should all go
slowly should be expected too; but now he wished to go.
 “Listen, Compadre,” he said. “It is very possible that you are right. But I have orders to
deliver that dispatch to the General commanding the Thirty-Fifth Division, which makes
an attack at daylight in these hills and it is already late at night and I must go.”
 “What attack? What do you know of an attack?”
 “Nay. I know nothing. But I must go now to Navacerrada and go on from there. Wilt
thou send me to thy commander who will give me transport to go on from there? Send
one with me now to respond to him that there be no delay.”
 “I distrust all of this greatly,” he said. “It might have been better to have shot thee as
thou approached the wire.”
 “You have seen my papers, Comrade, and I have explained my mission,” Andrés told
“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway 202
him patiently.
 “Papers can be forged,” the officer said. “Any fascist could invent such a mission. I will
go with thee myself to the Commander.”
 “Good,” Andrés said. “That you should come. But that we should go quickly.”
 “Thou, Sanchez. Thou commandest in my place,” the officer said. “Thou knowest thy
duties as well as I do. I take this so-called Comrade to the Commander.”
 They started down the shallow trench behind the crest of the hill and in the dark
Andrés smelt the foulness the defenders of the hill crest had made all through the
bracken on that slope. He did not like these people who were like dangerous children;
dirty, foul, undisciplined, kind, loving, silly and ignorant but always dangerous because
they were armed. He, Andrés, was without politics except that he was for the Republic.
He had heard these people talk many times and he thought what they said was often
beautiful and fine to hear but he did not like them. It is not liberty not to bury the mess
one makes, he thought. No animal has more liberty than the cat; but it buries the mess it
makes. The cat is the best anarchist. Until they learn that from the cat I cannot respect
them.
 Ahead of him the officer stopped suddenly.
 “You have your carabine still,” he said.
 “Yes,” Andrés said. “Why not?”
 “Give it to me,” the officer said. “You could shoot me in the back with it.”
 “Why?” Andrés asked him. “Why would I shoot thee in the back?”
 “One never knows,” the officer said. “I trust no one. Give me the carbine.”
 Andrés unslung it and handed it to him.
 “If it pleases thee to carry it,” he said.
 “It is better,” the officer said. “We are safer that way.”
 They went on down the hill in the dark.
37
 Now Robert Jordan lay with the girl and he watched time passing on his wrist. It went
slowly, almost imperceptibly, for it was a small watch and he could not see the second
hand. But as he watched the minute hand he found he could almost check its motion
with his concentration. The girl’s head was under his chin and when he moved his head
to look at the watch he felt the cropped head against his cheek, and it was as soft but as
alive and silkily rolling as when a marten’s fur rises under the caress of your hand when
you spread the trap jaws open and lift the marten clear and, holding it, stroke the fur
smooth. His throat swelled when his cheek moved against Maria’s hair and there was a
hollow aching from his throat all through him as he held his arms around her; his head
dropped, his eyes close to the watch where the lance-pointed, luminous splinter moved
slowly up the left face of the dial. He could see its movement clearly and steadily now
and he held Maria close now to slow it. He did not want to wake her but he could not
leave her alone now in this last time and he put his lips behind her ear and moved them
up along her neck, feeling the smooth skin and the soft touch of her hair on them. He
could see the hand moving on the watch and he held her tighter and ran the tip of his
tongue along her cheek and onto the lobe of her ear and along the lovely convolutions
to the sweet, firm rim at the top, and his tongue was trembling. He felt the trembling run
through all of the hollow aching and he saw the hand of the watch now mounting in
sharp angle toward the top where the hour was. Now while she still slept he turned her
head and put his lips to hers. They lay there, just touching lightly against the sleep-firm
mouth and he swung them softly across it, feeling them brush lightly. He turned himself
toward her and he felt her shiver along the long, light lovely body and then she sighed,
sleeping, and then she, still sleeping, held him too and then, unsleeping, her lips were
against his firm and hard and pressing and he said, “But the pain.”
 And she said, “Nay, there is no pain.”
 “Rabbit.”
“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway 203
 “Nay, speak not.”
 “My rabbit.”
 “Speak not. Speak not.”
 Then they were together so that as the hand on the watch moved, unseen now, they
knew that nothing could ever happen to the one that did not happen to the othei that no
other thing could happen more than this; that this was all and always; this was what had
been and now and whatever was to come. This, that they were not to have, they were
having. They were having now and before and always and now and now and now. Oh,
now, now, now, the only now, and above all now, and there is no other now but thou
now and now is thy prophet. Now and forever now. Come now, now, for there is no now
but now. Yes, now. Now, please now, only now, not anything else only this now, and
where are you and where am I and where is the other one, and not why, not ever why,
only this now; and on and always please then always now, always now, for now always
one now; one only one, there is no other one but one now, one, going now, rising now,
sailing now, leaving now, wheeling now, soaring now, away now, all the way now, all of
all the way now; one and one is one, is one, is one, is one, is still one, is still one, is one
descendingly, is one softly, is one longingly, is one kindly, is one happily, is one in
goodness, is one to cherish, is one now on earth with elbows against the cut and slepton branches of the pine tree with the smell of the pine boughs and the night; to earth
conclusively now, and with the morning of the day to come. Then he said, for the other
was only in his head and he had said nothing, “Oh, Maria, I love thee and I thank thee
for this.”
 Maria said, “Do not speak. It is better if we do not speak.”
 “I must tell thee for it is a great thing.”
 “Nay.”
 “Rabbit—”
 But she held him tight and turned her head away and he asked softly, “Is it pain,
rabbit?”
 “Nay,” she said. “It is that I am thankful too to have been another time in la gloria.”
 Then afterwards they lay quiet, side by side, all length of ankle, thigh, hip and shoulder
touching, Robert Jordan now with the watch where he could see it again and Maria said,
“We have had much good fortune.”
 “Yes,” he said, “we are people of much luck.”
 “There is not time to sleep?”
 “No,” he said, “it starts soon now.”
 “Then if we must rise let us go to get something to eat.”
 “All right.”
 “Thou. Thou art not worried about anything?”
 “No.”
 “Truly?”
 “No. Not now.”
 “But thou hast worried before?”
 “For a while.”
 “Is it aught I can help?”
 “Nay,” he said. “You have helped enough.”
 “That? That was for me.”
 “That was for us both,” he said. “No one is there alone. Come, rabbit, let us dress.”
 But his mind, that was his best companion, was thinking La Gloria. She said La Gloria.
It has nothing to do with glory nor La Gloire that the French write and speak about. It is
the thing that is in the Cante Hondo and in the Saetas. It is in Greco and in San Juan de
la Cruz, of course, and in the others. I am no mystic, but to deny it is as ignorant as
though you denied the telephone or that the earth revolves around the sun or that there
are other planets than this.
 How little we know of what there is to know. I wish that I were going to live a long time
instead of going to die today because I have learned much about life in these four days;
“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway 204
more, I think, than in all the other time. I’d like to be an old man and to really know. I
wonder if you keep on learning or if there is only a certain amount each man can
understand. I thought I knew about so many things that I know nothing of. I wish there
was more time.
 “You taught me a lot, guapa,” he said in English.
 “What did you say?”
 “I have learned much from thee.”
 “Qué va,” she said, “it is thou who art educated.”
 Educated, he thought. I have the very smallest beginnings of an education. The very
small beginnings. If I die on this day it is a waste because I know a few things now. I
wonder if you only learn them now because you are oversensitized because of the
shortness of the time? There is no such thing as a shortness of time, though. You
should have sense enough to know that too. I have been all my life in these hills since I
have been here. Anselmo is my oldest friend. I know him better than I know Charles,
than I know Chub, than I know Guy, than I know Mike, and I know them well. Agustín,
with his vile mouth, is my brother, and I never had a brother. Maria is my true love and
my wife. I never had a true love. I never had a wife. She is also my sister, and I never
had a sister, and my daughter, and I never will have a daughter. I hate to leave a thing
that is so good. He finished tying his rope-soled shoes.
 “I find life very interesting,” he said to Maria. She was sitting beside him on the robe,
her hands clasped around her ankles. Some one moved the blanket aside from the
entrance to the cave and they both saw the light. It was night still and here was no
promise of morning except that as he looked up through the pines he saw how low the
stars had swung. The morning would be coming fast now in this month.
 “Roberto,” Maria said.
 “Yes, guapa.”
 “In this of today we will be together, will we not?”
 “After the start, yes.”
 “Not at the start?”
 “No. Thou wilt be with the horses.”
 “I cannot be with thee?”
 “No. I have work that only I can do and I would worry about thee.”
 “But you will come fast when it is done?”
 “Very fast,” he said and grinned in the dark. “Come, guapa, let us go and eat.”
 “And thy robe?”
 “Roll it up, if it pleases thee.”
 “It pleases me,” she said.
 “I will help thee.”
 “Nay. Let me do it alone.”
 She knelt to spread and roll the robe, then changed her mind and stood up and shook
it so it flapped. Then she knelt down again to straighten it and roll it. Robert Jordan
picked up the two packs, holding them carefully so that nothing would spill from the slits
in them, and walked over through the pines to the cave mouth where the smoky blanket
hung. It was ten minutes to three by his watch when he pushed the blanket aside with
his elbow and went into the cave.
38
 They were in the cave and the men were standing before the fire Maria was fanning.
Pilar had coffee ready in a pot. She had not gone back to bed at all since she had
roused Robert Jordan and now she was sitting on a stool in the smoky cave sewing the
rip in one of Jordan’s packs. The other pack was already sewed. The firelight lit up her
face.
 “Take more of the stew,” she said to Fernando. “What does it matter if thy belly should
be full? There is no doctor to operate if you take a goring.”
“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway 205
 “Don’t speak that way, woman,” Agustín said. “Thou hast the tongue of the great
whore.”
 He was leaning on the automatic rifle, its legs folded close against the fretted barrel,
his pockets were full of grenades, a sack of pans hung from one shoulder, and a full
bandolier of ammunition hung over the other shoulder. He was smoking a cigarette and
he held a bowl of coffee in one hand and blew smoke onto its surface as he raised it to
his lips.
 “Thou art a walking hardware store,” Pilar said to him. “Thou canst not walk a hundred
yards with all that.”
 “Qué va, woman,” Agustín said. “It is all downhill.”
 “There is a climb to the post,” Fernando said. “Before the downward slope
commences.”
 “I will climb it like a goat,” Agustín said.
 “And thy brother?” he asked Eladio. “Thy famous brother has mucked off?”
 Eladio was standing against the wall.
 “Shut up,” he said.
 He was nervous and he knew they all knew it. He was always nervous and irritable
before action. He moved from the wall to the table and began filling his pockets with
grenades from one of the rawhide-covered panniers that leaned, open, against the table
leg.
 Robert Jordan squatted by the pannier beside him. He reached into the pannier and
picked out four grenades. Three were the oval Mill bomb type, serrated, heavy iron with
a spring level held down in position by a cotter pin with pulling rig attached.
 “Where did these come from?” he asked Eladio.
 “Those? Those are from the Republic. The old man brought them.”
 “How are they?”
 “Valen más que pesan,” Eladio said. “They are worth a fortune apiece.”
 “I brought those,” Anselmo said. “Sixty in one pack. Ninety pounds, Inglés.”
 “Have you used those?” Robert Jordan asked Pilar.
 “Qué va have we used them?” the woman said. “It was with those Pablo slew the post
at Otero.”
 When she mentioned Pablo, Agustín started cursing. Robert Jordan saw the look on
Pilar’s face in the firelight.
 “Leave it,” she said to Agustín sharply. “It does no good to talk.”
 “Have they always exploded?” Robert Jordan held the graypainted grenade in his
hand, trying the bend of the cotter pin with his thumbnail.
 “Always,” Eladio said. “There was not a dud in any of that lot we used.”
 “And how quickly?”
 “In the distance one can throw it. Quickly. Quickly enough.”
 “And these?”
 He held up a soup-tin-shaped bomb, with a tape wrapping around a wire loop.
 “They are a garbage,” Eladio told him. “They blow. Yes. But it is all flash and no
fragments.”
 “But do they always blow?”
 “Qué va, always,” Pilar said. “There is no always either with our munitions or theirs.”
 “But you said the other always blew.”
 “Not me,” Pilar told him. “You asked another, not me. I have seen no always in any of
that stuff.”
 “They all blew,” Eladio insisted. “Speak the truth, woman.”
 “How do you know they all blew?” Pilar asked him. “It was Pablo who threw them. You
killed no one at Otero.”
 “That son of the great whore,” Agustín began.
 “Leave it alone,” Pilar said sharply. Then she went on. “They are all much the same,
Inglés. But the corrugated ones are more simple.”
 I’d better use one of each on each set, Robert Jordan thought. But the serrated type
“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway 206
will lash easier and more securely.
 “Are you going to be throwing bombs, Inglés?” Agustín asked.
 “Why not?” Robert Jordan said.
 But crouched there, sorting out the grenades, what he was thinking was: it is
impossible. How I could have deceived myself about it I do not know. We were as sunk
when they attacked Sordo as Sordo was sunk when the snow stopped. It is that you
can’t accept it. You have to go on and make a plan that you know is impossible to carry
out. You made it and now you know it is no good. It’s no good, now, in the morning. You
can take either of the posts absolutely O.K. with what you’ve got here. But you can’t
take them both. You can’t be sure of it, I mean. Don’t deceive yourself. Not when the
daylight comes.
 Trying to take them both will never work. Pablo knew that all the time. I suppose he
always intended to muck off but he knew we were cooked when Sordo was attacked.
You can’t base an operation on the presumption that miracles are going to happen. You
will kill them all off and not even get your bridge blown if you have nothing better than
what you have now. You will kill off Pilar, Anselmo, Agustín, Primitivo, this jumpy Eladio,
the worthless gypsy and old Fernando, and you won’t get your bridge blown. Do you
suppose there will be a miracle and Golz will get the message from Andrés and stop it?
If there isn’t, you are going to kill them all off with those orders. Maria too. You’ll kill her
too with those orders. Can’t you even get her out of it? God damn Pablo to hell, he
thought.
 No. Don’t get angry. Getting angry is as bad as getting scared. But instead of sleeping
with your girl you should have ridden all night through these hills with the woman to try
to dig up enough people to make it work. Yes, he thought. And if anything happened to
me so I was not here to blow it. Yes. That. That’s why you weren’t out. And you couldn’t
send anybody out because you couldn’t run a chance of losing them and being short
one more. You had to keep what you had and make a plan to do it with them.
 But your plan stinks. It stinks, I tell you. It was a night plan and it’s morning now. Night
plans aren’t any good in the morning. The way you think at night is no good in the
morning. So now you know it is no good.
 What if John Mosby did get away with things as impossible as this? Sure he did. Much
more difficult. And remember, do not undervaluate the element of surprise. Remember
that. Remember it isn’t goofy if you can make it stick. But that is not the way you are
supposed to make it. You should make it not only possible but sure. But look at how it all
has gone. Well, it was wrong in the first place and such things accentuate disaster as a
snowball rolls up wet snow.
 He looked up from where he was squatted by the table and saw Maria and she smiled
at him. He grinned back with the front of his face and selected four more grenades and
put them in his pockets. I could unscrew the detonators and just use them, he thought.
But I don’t think the fragmentation will have any bad effect. It will come instantaneously
with the explosion of the charge and it won’t disperse it. At least, I don’t think it will. I’m
sure it won’t. Have a little confidence, he told himself. And you, last night, thinking about
how you and your grandfather were so terrific and your father was a coward. Show
yourself a little confidence now.
 He grinned at Maria again but the grin was still no deeper than the skin that felt tight
over his cheekbones and his mouth.
 She thinks you’re wonderful, he thought. I think you stink. And the gloria and all that
nonsense that you had. You had wonderful ideas, didn’t you? You had this world all
taped, didn’t you? The hell with all of that.
 Take it easy, he told himself. Don’t get into a rage. That’s just a way out too. There are
always ways out. You’ve got to bite on the nail now. There isn’t any need to deny
everything there’s been just because you are going to lose it. Don’t be like some
damned snake with a broken back biting at itself; and your back isn’t broken either, you
hound. Wait until you’re hurt before you start to cry. Wait until the fight before you get
angry. There’s lots of time for it in a fight. It will be some use to you in a fight.
“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway 207
 Pilar came over to him with the bag.
 “It is strong now,” she said. “Those grenades are very good, Inglés. You can have
confidence in them.”
 “How do you feel, woman?”
 She looked at him and shook her head and smiled. He wondered how far into her face
the smile went. It looked deep enough.
 “Good,” she said. “Dentro de la gravedad.”
 Then she said, squatting by him, “How does it seem to thee now that it is really
starting?”
 “That we are few,” Robert Jordan said to her quickly.
 “To me, too,” she said. “Very few.”
 Then she said still to him alone, “The Maria can hold the horses by herself. I am not
needed for that. We will hobble them. They are cavalry horses and the firing will not
panic them. I will go to the lower post and do that which was the duty of Pablo. In this
way we are one more.”
 “Good,” he said. “I thought you might wish to.”
 “Nay, Inglés,” Pilar said looking at him closely. “Do not be worried. All will be well.
Remember they expect no such thing to come to them.”
 “Yes,” Robert Jordan said.
 “One other thing, Inglés,” Pilar said as softly as her harsh whisper could be soft. “In
that thing of the hand—”
 “What thing of the hand?” he said angrily.
 “Nay, listen. Do not be angry, little boy. In regard to that thing of the hand. That is all
gypsy nonsense that I make to give myself an importance. There is no such thing.”
 “Leave it alone,” he said coldly.
 “Nay,” she said harshly and lovingly. “It is just a lying nonsense that I make. I would
not have thee worry in the day of battle.”
 “I am not worried,” Robert Jordan said.
 “Yes, Inglés,” she said. “Thou art very worried, for good cause. But all will be well,
Inglés. It is for this that we are born.”
 “I don’t need a political commissar,” Robert Jordan told her.
 She smiled at him again, smiling fairly and truly with the harsh lips and the wide
mouth, and said, “I care for thee very much, Inglés.”
 “I don’t want that now,” he said. “Ni tu, ni Dios.”
 “Yes,” Pilar said in that husky whisper. “I know. I only wished to tell thee. And do not
worry. We will do all very well.”
 “Why not?” Robert Jordan said and the very thinnest edge of the skin in front of his
face smiled. “Of course we will. All will be well.”
 “When do we go?” Pilar asked.
 Robert Jordan looked at his watch.
 “Any time,” he said.
 He handed one of the packs to Anselmo.
 “How are you doing, old one?” he asked.
 The old man was finishing whittling the last of a pile of wedges he had copied from a
model Robert Jordan had given him. These were extra wedges in case they should be
needed.
 “Well,” the old man said and nodded. “So far, very well.” He held his hand out. “Look,”
he said and smiled. His hands were perfectly steady.
 “Bueno, y qué?” Robert Jordan said to him. “I can always keep the whole hand steady.
Point with one finger.”
 Anselmo pointed. The finger was trembling. He looked at Robert Jordan and shook his
head.
 “Mine too,” Robert Jordan showed him. “Always. That is normal.”
 “Not for me,” Fernando said. He put his right forefinger out to show them. Then the left
forefinger.
“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway 208
 “Canst thou spit?” Agustín asked him and winked at Robert Jordan.
 Fernando hawked and spat proudly onto the floor of the cave, then rubbed it in the dirt
with his foot.
 “You filthy mule,” Pilar said to him. “Spit in the fire if thou must vaunt thy courage.”
 “I would not have spat on the floor, Pilar, if we were not leaving this place,” Fernando
said primly.
 “Be careful where you spit today,” Pilar told him. “It may be some place you will not be
leaving.”
 “That one speaks like a black cat,” Agustín said. He had the nervous necessity to joke
that is another form of what they all felt.
 “I joke,” said Pilar.
 “Me too,” said Agustín. “But me cago en la leche, but I will be content when it starts.”
 “Where is the gypsy?” Robert Jordan asked Eladio.
 “With the horses,” Eladio said. “You can see him from the cave mouth.”
 “How is he?”
 Eladio grinned. “With much fear,” he said. It reassured him to speak of the fear of
another.
 “Listen, Inglés—” Pilar began. Robert Jordan looked toward her and as he did he saw
her mouth open and the unbelieving look come on her face and he swung toward the
cave mouth reaching for his pistol. There, holding the blanket aside with one hand, the
short automatic rifle muzzle with its flash-cone jutting above his shoulder, was Pablo
standing short, wide, bristly-faced, his small red-rimmed eyes looking toward no one in
particular.
 “Thou—” Pilar said to him unbelieving. “Thou.”
 “Me,” said Pablo evenly. He came into the cave.
 “Hola, Inglés,” he said. “I have five from the bands of Elias and Alejandro above with
their horses.”
 “And the exploder and the detonators?” Robert Jordan said. “And the other material?”
 “I threw them down the gorge into the river,” Pablo said still looking at no one. “But I
have thought of a way to detonate using a grenade.”
 “So have I,” Robert Jordan said.
 “Have you a drink of anything?” Pablo asked wearily.
 Robert Jordan handed him the flask and he swallowed fast, then wiped his mouth on
the back of his hand.
 “What passes with you?” Pilar asked.
 “Nada,” Pablo said, wiping his mouth again. “Nothing. I have come back.”
 “But what?”
 “Nothing. I had a moment of weakness. I went away but I am come back.”
 He turned to Robert Jordan. “En el fondo no soy cobarde,” he said. “At bottom I am
not a coward.”
 But you are very many other things, Robert Jordan thought. Damned if you’re not. But
I’m glad to see you, you son of a bitch.
 “Five was all I could get from Elias and Alejandro,” Pablo said. “I have ridden since I
left here. Nine of you could never have done it. Never. I knew that last night when the
Inglés explained it. Never. There are seven men and a corporal at the lower post.
Suppose there is an alarm or that they fight?”
 He looked at Robert Jordan now. “When I left I thought you would know that it was
impossible and would give it up. Then after I had thrown away thy material I saw it in
another manner.”
 “I am glad to see thee,” Robert Jordan said. He walked over to him. “We are all right
with the grenades. That will work. The other does not matter now.”
 “Nay,” Pablo said. “I do nothing for thee. Thou art a thing of bad omen. All of this
comes from thee. Sordo also. But after I had thrown away thy material I found myself
too lonely.”
 “Thy mother—” Pilar said.
“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway 209
 “So I rode for the others to make it possible for it to be successful. I have brought the
best that I could get. I have left them at the top so I could speak to you, first. They think I
am the leader.”
 “Thou art,” Pilar said. “If thee wishes.” Pablo looked at her and said nothing. Then he
said simply and quietly, “I have thought much since the thing of Sordo. I believe if we
must finish we must finish together. But thou, Inglés. I hate thee for bringing this to us.”
 “But Pablo—” Fernando, his pockets full of grenades, a bandolier of cartridges over
his shoulder, he still wiping in his pan of stew with a piece of bread, began. “Do you not
believe the operation can be successful? Night before last you said you were convinced
it would be.”
 “Give him some more stew,” Pilar said viciously to Maria. Then to Pablo, her eyes
softening, “So you have come back, eh?”
 “Yes, woman,” Pablo said.
 “Well, thou art welcome,” Pilar said to him. “I did not think thou couldst be the ruin thou
appeared to be.”
 “Having done such a thing there is a loneliness that cannot be borne,” Pablo said to
her quietly.
 “That cannot be borne,” she mocked him. “That cannot be borne by thee for fifteen
minutes.”
 “Do not mock me, woman. I have come back.”
 “And thou art welcome,” she said. “Didst not hear me the first time? Drink thy coffee
and let us go. So much theatre tires me.”
 “Is that coffee?” Pablo asked.
 “Certainly,” Fernando said.
 “Give me some, Maria,” Pablo said. “How art thou?” He did not look at her.
 “Well,” Maria told him and brought him a bowl of coffee. “Do you want stew?” Pablo
shook his head.
 “No me gusta estar solo,” Pablo went on explaining to Pilar as though the others were
not there. “I do not like to be alone. Sabes? Yesterday all day alone working for the
good of all I was not lonely. But last night. Hombre!Qué mal lo pasé!”
 “Thy predecessor the famous Judas Iscariot hanged himself,” Pilar said.
 “Don’t talk to me that way, woman,” Pablo said. “Have you not seen? I am back. Don’t
talk of Judas nor nothing of that. I am back.”
 “How are these people thee brought?” Pilar asked him. “Hast brought anything worth
bringing?”
 “Son buenos,” Pablo said. He took a chance and looked at Pilar squarely, then looked
away.
 “Buenos y bobos. Good ones and stupids. Ready to die and all. A tu gusto. According
to thy taste. The way you like them.”
 Pablo looked Pilar in the eyes again and this time he did not look away. He kept on
looking at her squarely with his small, redrimmed pig eyes.
 “Thou,” she said and her husky voice was fond again. “Thou. I suppose if a man has
something once, always something of it remains.”
 “Listo,” Pablo said, looking at her squarely and flatly now. “I am ready for what the day
brings.”
 “I believe thou art back,” Pilar said to him. “I believe it. But, hombre, thou wert a long
way gone.”
 “Lend me another swallow from thy bottle,” Pablo said to Robert Jordan. “And then let
us be going.”
 In the dark they came up the hill through the timber to the narrow pass at the top.
They were all loaded heavily and they climbed slowly. The horses had loads too, packed
over the saddles.
 “We can cut them loose if it is necessary,” Pilar had said. “But with that, if we can keep
it, we can make another camp.”
 “And the rest of the ammunition?” Robert Jordan had asked as they lashed the packs.
“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway 210
 “In those saddlebags.”
 Robert Jordan felt the weight of his heavy pack, the dragging on his neck from the pull
of his jacket with its pockets full of grenades, the weight of his pistol against his thigh,
and the bulging of his trouser pockets where the clips for the submachine gun were. In
his mouth was the taste of the coffee, in his right hand he carried the submachine gun
and with his left hand he reached and pulled up the collar of his jacket to ease the pull of
the pack straps.
 “Inglés,” Pablo said to him, walking close beside him in the dark.
 “What, man?”
 “These I have brought think this is to be successful because I have brought them,”
Pablo said. “Do not say anything to disillusion them.”
 “Good,” Robert Jordan said. “But let us make it successful.”
 “They have five horses, sabes?” Pablo said cautiously.
 “Good,” said Robert Jordan. “We will keep all the horses together.”
 “Good,” said Pablo, and nothing more.
 I didn’t think you had experienced any complete conversion on the road to Tarsus, old
Pablo, Robert Jordan thought. No. Your coming back was miracle enough. I don’t think
there will ever be any problem about canonizing you.
 “With those five I will deal with the lower post as well as Sordo would have,” Pablo
said. “I will cut the wire and fall back upon the bridge as we convened.”
 We went over this all ten minutes ago, Robert Jordan thought. I wonder why this
now—
 “There is a possibility of making it to Gredos,” Pablo said. “Truly, I have thought much
of it.”
 I believe you’ve had another flash in the last few minutes, Robert Jordan said to
himself. You have had another revelation. But you’re not going to convince me that I am
invited. No, Pablo. Do not ask me to believe too much.
 Ever since Pablo had come into the cave and said he had five men Robert Jordan felt
increasingly better. Seeing Pablo again had broken the pattern of tragedy into which the
whole operation had seemed grooved ever since the snow, and since Pablo had been
back he felt not that his luck had turned, since he did not believe in luck, but that the
whole thing had turned for the better and that now it was possible. Instead of the surety
of failure he felt confidence rising in him as a tire begins to fill with air from a slow pump.
There was little difference at first, although there was a definite beginning, as when the
pump starts and the rubber of the tube crawls a little, but it came now as steadily as a
tide rising or the sap rising in a tree until he began to feel the first edge of that negation
of apprehension that often turned into actual happiness before action.
 This was the greatest gift that he had, the talent that fitted him for war; that ability not
to ignore but to despise whatever bad ending there could be. This quality was destroyed
by too much responsibility for others or the necessity of undertaking something ill
planned or badly conceived. For in such things the bad ending, failure, could not be
ignored. It was not simply a possibility of harm to one’s self, which could be ignored. He
knew he himself was nothing, and he knew death was nothing. He knew that truly, as
truly as he knew anything. In the last few days he had learned that he himself, with
another person, could be everything. But inside himself he knew that this was the
exception. That we have had, he thought. In that I have been most fortunate. That was
given to me, perhaps, because I never asked for it. That cannot be taken away nor lost.
But that is over and done with now on this morning and what there is to do now is our
work.
 And you, he said to himself, I am glad to see you getting a little something back that
was badly missing for a time. But you were pretty bad back there. I was ashamed
enough of you, there for a while. Only I was you. There wasn’t any me to judge you. We
were all in bad shape. You and me and both of us. Come on now. Quit thinking like a
schizophrenic. One at a time, now. You’re all right again now. But listen, you must not
think of the girl all day ever. You can do nothing now to protect her except to keep her
“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway 211
out of it, and that you are doing. There are evidently going to be plenty of horses if you
can believe the signs. The best thing you can do for her is to do the job well and fast
and get out, and thinking of her will only handicap you in this. So do not think of her
ever.
 Having thought this out he waited until Maria came up walking with Pilar and Rafael
and the horses.
 “Hi, guapa,” he said to her in the dark, “how are you?”
 “I am well, Roberto,” she said.
 “Don’t worry about anything,” he said to her and shifting the gun to his left hand he put
a hand on her shoulder.
 “I do not,” she said.
 “It is all very well organized,” he told her. “Rafael will be with thee with the horses.”
 “I would rather be with thee.”
 “Nay. The horses is where thou art most useful.”
 “Good,” she said. “There I will be.”
 Just then one of the horses whinnied and from the open place below the opening
through the rocks a horse answered, the neigh rising into a shrill sharply broken quaver.
 Robert Jordan saw the bulk of the new horses ahead in the dark. He pressed forward
and came up to them with Pablo. The men were standing by their mounts.
 “Salud,” Robert Jordan said.
 “Salud,” they answered in the dark. He could not see their faces.
 “This is the Inglés who comes with us,” Pablo said. “The dynamiter.”
 No one said anything to that. Perhaps they nodded in the dark.
 “Let us get going, Pablo,” one man said. “Soon we will have the daylight on us.”
 “Did you bring any more grenades?” another asked.
 “Plenty,” said Pablo. “Supply yourselves when we leave the animals.”
 “Then let us go,” another said. “We’ve been waiting here half the night.”
 “Hola, Pilar,” another said as the woman came up.
 “Que me maten, if it is not Pepe,” Pilar said huskily. “How are you, shepherd?”
 “Good,” said the man. “Dentro de la gravedad.”
 “What are you riding?” Pilar asked him.
 “The gray of Pablo,” the man said. “It is much horse.”
 “Come on,” another man said. “Let us go. There is no good in gossiping here.”
 “How art thou, Elicio?” Pilar said to him as he mounted.
 “How would I be?” he said rudely. “Come on, woman, we have work to do.”
 Pablo mounted the big bay horse.
 “Keep thy mouths shut and follow me,” he said. “I will lead you to the place where we
will leave the horses.”
40
 During the time that Robert Jordan had slept through, the time he had spent planning
the destruction of the bridge and the time that he had been with Maria, Andrés had
made slow progress. Until he had reached the Republican lines he had travelled across
country and through the fascist lines as fast as a countryman in good physical condition
who knew the country well could travel in the dark. But once inside the Republican lines
it went very slowly.
 In theory he should only have had to show the safe-conduct given him by Robert
Jordan stamped with the seal of the S. I. M. and the dispatch which bore the same seal
and be passed along toward his destination with the greatest speed. But first he had
encountered the company commander in the front line who had regarded the whole
mission with owlishly grave suspicion.
 He had followed this company commander to battalion headquarters where the
battalion commander, who had been a barber before the movement, was filled with
enthusiasm on hearing the account of his mission. This commander, who was named
“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway 212
Gomez, cursed the company commander for his stupidity, patted Andrés on the back,
gave him a drink of bad brandy and told him that he himself, the ex-barber, had always
wanted to be a guerrillero. He had then roused his adjutant, turned over the battalion to
him, and sent his orderly to wake up and bring his motorcyclist. Instead of sending
Andrés back to brigade headquarters with the motorcyclist, Gomez had decided to take
him there himself in order to expedite things and, with Andrés holding tight onto the seat
ahead of him, they roared, bumping down the shell-pocked mountain road between the
double row of big trees, the headlight of the motorcycle showing their whitewashed
bases and the places on the trunks where the whitewash and the bark had been
chipped and torn by shell fragments and bullets during the fighting along this road in the
first summer of the movement. They turned into the little smashed-roofed mountainresort town where brigade headquarters was and Gomez had braked the motorcycle like
a dirt-track racer and leaned it against the wall of the house where a sleepy sentry came
to attention as Gomez pushed by him into the big room where the walls were covered
with maps and a very sleepy officer with a green eyeshade sat at a desk with a reading
lamp, two telephones and a copy of Mundo Obrero.
 This officer looked up at Gomez and said, “What doest thou here? Have you never
heard of the telephone?”
 “I must see the Lieutenant-Colonel,” Gomez said.
 “He is asleep,” the officer said. “I could see the lights of that bicycle of thine for a mile
coming down the road. Dost wish to bring on a shelling?”
 “Call the Lieutenant-Colonel,” Gomez said. “This is a matter of the utmost gravity.”
 “He is asleep, I tell thee,” the officer said. “What sort of a bandit is that with thee?” he
nodded toward Andrés.
 “He is a guerrillero from the other side of the lines with a dispatch of the utmost
importance for the General Golz who commands the attack that is to be made at dawn
beyond Navacerrada,” Gomez said excitedly and earnestly. “Rouse the TenienteCoronel for the love of God.”
 The officer looked at him with his droopy eyes shaded by the green celluloid.
 “All of you are crazy,” he said. “I know of no General Golz nor of no attack. Take this
sportsman and get back to your battalion.”
 “Rouse the Teniente-Coronel, I say,” Gomez said and Andrés saw his mouth
tightening.
 “Go obscenity yourself,” the officer said to him lazily and turned away.
 Gomez took his heavy 9 mm. Star pistol out of its holster and shoved it against the
officer’s shoulder.
 “Rouse him, you fascist bastard,” he said. “Rouse him or I’ll kill you.”
 “Calm yourself,” the officer said. “All you barbers are emotional.”
 Andrés saw Gomez’s face draw with hate in the light of the reading lamp. But all he
said was, “Rouse him.”
 “Orderly,” the officer called in a contemptuous voice.
 A soldier came to the door and saluted and went out.
 “His fiancée is with him,” the officer said and went back to reading the paper. “It is
certain he will be delighted to see you.”
 “It is those like thee who obstruct all effort to win this war,” Gomez said to the staff
officer.
 The officer paid no attention to him. Then, as he read on, he remarked, as though to
himself, “What a curious periodical this is!”
 “Why don’t you read El Debate then? That is your paper,” Gomez said to him naming
the leading Catholic-Conservative organ published in Madrid before the movement.
 “Don’t forget I am thy superior officer and that a report by me on thee carries weight,”
the officer said without looking up. “I never read El Debate. Do not make false
accusations.”
 “No. You read A. B. C.,” Gomez said. “The army is still rotten with such as thee. With
professionals such as thee. But it will not always be. We are caught between the
“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway 213
ignorant and the cynical. But we will educate the one and eliminate the other.”
 “‘Purge’ is the word you want,” the officer said, still not looking up. “Here it reports the
purging of more of thy famous Russians. They are purging more than the epsom salts in
this epoch.”
 “By any name,” Gomez said passionately. “By any name so that such as thee are
liquidated.”
 “Liquidated,” the officer said insolently as though speaking to himself. “Another new
word that has little of Castilian in it.”
 “Shot, then,” Gomez said. “That is Castilian. Canst understand it?”
 “Yes, man, but do not talk so loudly. There are others beside the Teniente-Coronel
asleep in this Brigade Staff and thy emotion bores me. It was for that reason that I
always shaved myself. I never liked the conversation.”
 Gomez looked at Andrés and shook his head. His eyes were shining with the
moistness that rage and hatred can bring. But he shook his head and said nothing as he
stored it all away for some time in the future. He had stored much in the year and a half
in which he had risen to the command of a battalion in the Sierra and now, as the
Lieutenant-Colonel came into the room in his pajamas he drew himself stiff and saluted.
 The Lieutenant-Colonel Miranda, who was a short, gray-faced man, who had been in
the army all his life, who had lost the love of his wife in Madrid while he was losing his
digestion in Morocco, and become a Republican when he found he could not divorce his
wife (there was never any question of recovering his digestion), had entered the civil war
as a Lieutenant-Colonel. He had only one ambition, to finish the war with the same rank.
He had defended the Sierra well and he wanted to be left alone there to defend it
whenever it was attacked. He felt much healthier in the war, probably due to the forced
curtailment of the number of meat courses, he had an enormous stock of sodiumbicarbonate, he had his whiskey in the evening, his twenty-three-year-old mistress was
having a baby, as were nearly all the other girls who had started out as milicianas in the
July of the year before, and now he came into the room, nodded in answer to Gomez’s
salute and put out his hand.
 “What brings thee, Gomez?” he asked and then, to the officer at the desk who was his
chief of operation, “Give me a cigarette, please, Pepe.”
 Gomez showed him Andrés’s papers and the dispatch. The Lieutenant-Colonel looked
at the Salvoconducto quickly, looked at Andrés, nodded and smiled, and then looked at
the dispatch hungrily. He felt of the seal, tested it with his forefinger, then handed both
the safe-conduct and dispatch back to Andrés.
 “Is the life very hard there in the hills?” he asked.
 “No, my Lieutenant-Colonel,” Andrés said.
 “Did they tell thee where would be the closest point to find General Golz’s
headquarters?”
 “Navacerrada, my Lieutenant-Colonel,” Andrés said. “The Inglés said it would be
somewhere close to Navacerrada behind the lines to the right of there.”
 “What Inglés?” the Lieutenant-Colonel asked quietly.
 “The Inglés who is with us as a dynamiter.”
 The Lieutenant-Colonel nodded. It was just another sudden unexplained rarity of this
war. “The Inglés who is with us as a dynamiter.”
 “You had better take him, Gomez, on the motor,” the Lieutenant-Colonel said. “Write
them a very strong Salvoconducto to the Estado Mayor of General Golz for me to sign,”
he said to the officer in the green celluloid eyeshade. “Write it on the machine, Pepe.
Here are the details,” he motioned for Andrés to hand over his safe-conduct, “and put on
two seals.” He turned to Gomez. “You will need something strong tonight. It is rightly so.
People should be careful when an offensive is projected. I will give you something as
strong as I can make it.” Then to Andrés, very kindly, he said, “Dost wish anything? To
eat or to drink?”
 “No, my Lieutenant-Colonel,” Andrés said. “I am not hungry. They gave me cognac at
the last place of command and more would make me seasick.”
“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway 214
 “Did you see any movement or activity opposite my front as you came through?” the
Lieutenant-Colonel asked Andrés politely.
 “It was as usual, my Lieutenant-Colonel. Quiet. Quiet.”
 “Did I not meet thee in Cercedilla about three months back?” the Lieutenant-Colonel
asked.
 “Yes, my Lieutenant-Colonel.”
 “I thought so,” the Lieutenant-Colonel patted him on the shoulder. “You were with the
old man Anselmo. How is he?”
 “He is well, my Lieutenant-Colonel,” Andrés told him.
 “Good. It makes me happy,” the Lieutenant-Colonel said. The officer showed him what
he had typed and he read it over and signed it. “You must go now quickly,” he said to
Gomez and Andrés. “Be careful with the motor,” he said to Gomez. “Use your lights.
Nothing will happen from a single motor and you must be careful. My compliments to
Comrade General Golz. We met after Peguerinos.” He shook hands with them both.
“Button the papers inside thy shirt,” he said. “There is much wind on a motor.”
 After they went out he went to a cabinet, took out a glass and a bottle, and poured
himself some whiskey and poured plain water into it from an earthenware crock that
stood on the floor against the wall. Then holding the glass and sipping the whiskey very
slowly he stood in front of the big map on the wall and studied the offensive possibilities
in the country above Navacerrada.
 “I am glad it is Golz and not me,” he said finally to the officer who sat at the table. The
officer did not answer and looking away from the map and at the officer the LieutenantColonel saw he was asleep with his head on his arms. The Lieutenant-Colonel went
over to the desk and pushed the two phones close together so that one touched the
officer’s head on either side. Then he walked to the cupboard, poured himself another
whiskey, put water in it, and went back to the map again.
 Andrés, holding tight onto the seat where Gomez was forking the motor, bent his head
against the wind as the motorcycle moved, noisily exploding, into the light-split darkness
of the country road that opened ahead sharp with the high black of the poplars beside it,
dimmed and yellow-soft now as the road dipped into the fog along a stream bed,
sharpening hard again as the road rose and, ahead of them at the crossroads, the
headlight showed the gray bulk of the empty trucks coming down from the mountains.
41
 Pablo stopped and dismounted in the dark. Robert Jordan heard the creaking and the
heavy breathing as they all dismounted and the clinking of a bridle as a horse tossed his
head. He smelled the horses and the unwashed and sour slept-in-clothing smell of the
new men and the wood-smoky sleep-stale smell of the others who had been in the cave.
Pablo was standing close to him and he smelled the brassy, dead-wine smell that came
from him like the taste of a copper coin in your mouth. He lit a cigarette, cupping his
hand to hide the light, pulled deep on it, and heard Pablo say very softly, “Get the
grenade sack, Pilar, while we hobble these.”
 “Agustín,” Robert Jordan said in a whisper, “you and Anselmo come now with me to
the bridge. Have you the sack of pans for the máquina?”
 “Yes,” Agustín said. “Why not?”
 Robert Jordan went over to where Pilar was unpacking one of the horses with the help
of Primitivo.
 “Listen, woman,” he said softly.
 “What now?” she whispered huskily, swinging a cinch hook clear from under the
horse’s belly.
 “Thou understandest that there is to be no attack on the post until thou hearest the
falling of the bombs?”
 “How many times dost thou have to tell me?” Pilar said. “You are getting like an old
woman, Inglés.”
“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway 215
 “Only to check,” Robert Jordan said. “And after the destruction of the post you fall
back onto the bridge and cover the road from above and my left flank.”
 “The first time thou outlined it I understood it as well as I will ever understand it,” Pilar
whispered to him. “Get thee about thy business.”
 “That no one should make a move nor fire a shot nor throw a bomb until the noise of
the bombardment comes,” Robert Jordan said softly.
 “Do not molest me more,” Pilar whispered angrily. “I have understood this since we
were at Sordo’s.”
 Robert Jordan went to where Pablo was tying the horses. “I have only hobbled those
which are liable to panic,” Pablo said. “These are tied so a pull of the rope will release
them, see?”
 “Good.”
 “I will tell the girl and the gypsy how to handle them,” Pablo said. His new men were
standing in a group by themselves leaning on their carbines.
 “Dost understand all?” Robert Jordan asked.
 “Why not?” Pablo said. “Destroy the post. Cut the wire. Fall back on the bridge. Cover
the bridge until thou blowest.”
 “And nothing to start until the commencement of the bombardment.”
 “Thus it is.”
 “Well then, much luck.”
 Pablo grunted. Then he said, “Thou wilt cover us well with the máquina and with thy
small máquina when we come back, eh, Inglés?”
 “Dela primera,” Robert Jordan said. “Off the top of the basket.”
 “Then,” Pablo said. “Nothing more. But in that moment thou must be very careful,
Inglés. It will not be simple to do that unless thou art very careful.”
 “I will handle the máquina myself,” Robert Jordan said to him.
 “Hast thou much experience? For I am of no mind to be shot by Agustín with his belly
full of good intentions.”
 “I have much experience. Truly. And if Agustín uses either máquina I will see that he
keeps it way above thee. Above, above and above.”
 “Then nothing more,” Pablo said. Then he said softly and confidentially, “There is still
a lack of horses.”
 The son of a bitch, Robert Jordan thought. Or does he think I did not understand him
the first time.
 “I go on foot,” he said. “The horses are thy affair.”
 “Nay, there will be a horse for thee, Inglés,” Pablo said softly. “There will be horses for
all of us.”
 “That is thy problem,” Robert Jordan said. “Thou dost not have to count me. Hast
enough rounds for thy new máquina?”
 “Yes,” Pablo said. “All that the cavalryman carried. I have fired only four to try it. I tried
it yesterday in the high hills.”
 “We go now,” Robert Jordan said. “We must be there early and well hidden.”
 “We all go now,” Pablo said. “Suerte, Inglés.”
 I wonder what the bastard is planning now, Robert Jordan said. But I am pretty sure I
know. Well, that is his, not mine. Thank God I do not know these new men.
 He put his hand out and said, “Suerte, Pablo,” and their two hands gripped in the dark.
 Robert Jordan, when he put his hand out, expected that it would be like grasping
something reptilian or touching a leper. He did not know what Pablo’s hand would feel
like. But in the dark Pablo’s hand gripped his hard and pressed it frankly and he
returned the grip. Pablo had a good hand in the dark and feeling it gave Robert Jordan
the strangest feeling he had felt that morning. We must be allies now, he thought. There
was always much handshaking with allies. Not to mention decorations and kissing on
both cheeks, he thought. I’m glad we do not have to do that. I suppose all allies are like
this. They always hate each other au fond. But this Pablo is a strange man.
 “Suerte, Pablo,” he said and gripped the strange, firm, purposeful hand hard. “I will
“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway 216
cover thee well. Do not worry.”
 “I am sorry for having taken thy material,” Pablo said. “It was an equivocation.”
 “But thou has brought what we needed.”
 “I do not hold this of the bridge against thee, Inglés,” Pablo said. “I see a successful
termination for it.”
 “What are you two doing? Becoming maricones?” Pilar said suddenly beside them in
the dark. “That is all thou hast lacked,” she said to Pablo. “Get along, Inglés, and cut thy
good-bys short before this one steals the rest of thy explosive.”
 “Thou dost not understand me, woman,” Pablo said. “The Inglés and I understand one
another.”
 “Nobody understands thee. Neither God nor thy mother,” Pilar said. “Nor I either. Get
along, Inglés. Make thy good-bys with thy cropped head and go. Me cago en tu padre,
but I begin to think thou art afraid to see the bull come out.”
 “Thy mother,” Robert Jordan said.
 “Thou never hadst one,” Pilar whispered cheerfully. “Now go, because I have a great
desire to start this and get it over with. Go with thy people,” she said to Pablo. “Who
knows how long their stern resolution is good for? Thou hast a couple that I would not
trade thee for. Take them and go.”
 Robert Jordan slung his pack on his back and walked over to the horses to find Maria.
 “Good-by, guapa,” he said. “I will see thee soon.”
 He had an unreal feeling about all of this now as though he had said it all before or as
though it were a train that were going, especially as though it were a train and he was
standing on the platform of a railway station.
 “Good-by, Roberto,” she said. “Take much care.”
 “Of course,” he said. He bent his head to kiss her and his pack rolled forward against
the back of his head so that his forehead bumped hers hard. As this happened he knew
this had happened before too.
 “Don’t cry,” he said, awkward not only from the load.
 “I do not,” she said. “But come back quickly.”
 “Do not worry when you hear the firing. There is bound to be much firing.”
 “Nay. Only come back quickly.”
 “Good-by, guapa,” he said awkwardly.
 “Salud, Roberto.”
 Robert Jordan had not felt this young since he had taken the train at Red Lodge to go
down to Billings to get the train there to go away to school for the first time. He had been
afraid to go and he did not want any one to know it and, at the station, just before the
conductor picked up the box he would step up on to reach the steps of the day coach,
his father had kissed him good-by and said, “May the Lord watch between thee and me
while we are absent the one from the other.” His father had been a very religious man
and he had said it simply and sincerely. But his moustache had been moist and his eyes
were damp with emotion and Robert Jordan had been so embarrassed by all of it, the
damp religious sound of the prayer, and by his father kissing him good-by, that he had
felt suddenly so much older than his father and sorry for him that he could hardly bear it.
 After the train started he had stood on the rear platform and watched the station and
the water tower grow smaller and smaller and the rails crossed by the ties narrowed
toward a point where the station and the water tower stood now minute and tiny in the
steady clicking that was taking him away.
 The brakeman said, “Dad seemed to take your going sort of hard, Bob.”
 “Yes,” he had said watching the sagebrush that ran from the edge of the road bed
between the passing telegraph poles across to the streaming-by dusty stretching of the
road. He was looking for sage hens.
 “You don’t mind going away to school?”
 “No,” he had said and it was true.
 It would not have been true before but it was true that minute and it was only now, at
this parting, that he ever felt as young again as he had felt before that train left. He felt
“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway 217
very young now and very awkward and he was saying good-by as awkwardly as one
can be when saying good-by to a young girl when you are a boy in school, saying goodby at the front porch, not knowing whether to kiss the girl or not. Then he knew it was
not the good-by he was being awkward about. It was the meeting he was going to. The
good-by was only a part of the awkwardness he felt about the meeting.
 You’re getting them again, he told himself. But I suppose there is no one that does not
feel that he is too young to do it. He would not put a name to it. Come on, he said to
himself. Come on. It is too early for your second childhood.
 “Good-by, guapa,” he said. “Good-by, rabbit.”
 “Good-by, my Roberto,” she said and he went over to where Anselmo and Agustín
were standing and said, “Vamonos.”
 Anselmo swung his heavy pack up. Agustín, fully loaded since the cave, was leaning
against a tree, the automatic rifle jutting over the top of his load.
 “Good,” he said, “Vamonos.”
 The three of them started down the hill.
 “Buena suerte, Don Roberto,” Fernando said as the three of them passed him as they
moved in single file between the trees. Fernando was crouched on his haunches a little
way from where they passed but he spoke with great dignity.
 “Buena suerte thyself, Fernando,” Robert Jordan said.
 “In everything thou doest,” Agustín said.
 “Thank you, Don Roberto,” Fernando said, undisturbed by Agustín.
 “That one is a phenomenon, Inglés,” Agustín whispered.
 “I believe thee,” Robert Jordan said. “Can I help thee? Thou art loaded like a horse.”
 “I am all right,” Agustín said. “Man, but I am content we are started.”
 “Speak softly,” Anselmo said. “From now on speak little and softly.”
 Walking carefully, downhill, Anselmo in the lead, Agustín next, Robert Jordan placing
his feet carefully so that he would not slip, feeling the dead pine needles under his ropesoled shoes, bumping a tree root with one foot and putting a hand forward and feeling
the cold metal jut of the automatic rifle barrel and the folded legs of the tripod, then
working sideways down the hill, his shoes sliding and grooving the forest floor, putting
his left hand out again and touching the rough bark of a tree trunk, then as he braced
himself his hand feeling a smooth place, the base of the palm of his hand coming away
sticky from the resinous sap where a blaze had been cut, they dropped down the steep
wooded hillside to the point above the bridge where Robert Jordan and Anselmo had
watched the first day.
 Now Anselmo was halted by a pine tree in the dark and he took Robert Jordan’s wrist
and whispered, so low Jordan could hardly hear him, “Look. There is the fire in his
brazier.”
 It was a point of light below where Robert Jordan knew the bridge joined the road.
 “Here is where we watched,” Anselmo said. He took Robert Jordan’s hand and bent it
down to touch a small fresh blaze low on a tree trunk. “This I marked while thou
watched. To the right is where thou wished to put the máquina.”
 “We will place it there.”
 “Good.”
 They put the packs down behind the base of the pine trunks and the two of them
followed Anselmo over to the level place where there was a clump of seedling pines.
 “It is here,” Anselmo said. “Just here.”
 “From here, with daylight,” Robert Jordan crouched behind the small trees whispered
to Agustín, “thou wilt see a small stretch of road and the entrance to the bridge. Thou
wilt see the length of the bridge and a small stretch of road at the other end before it
rounds the curve of the rocks.”
 Agustín said nothing.
 “Here thou wilt lie while we prepare the exploding and fire on anything that comes
from above or below.”
 “Where is that light?” Agustín asked.
“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway 218
 “In the sentry box at this end,” Robert Jordan whispered.
 “Who deals with the sentries?”
 “The old man and I, as I told thee. But if we do not deal with them, thou must fire into
the sentry boxes and at them if thou seest them.”
 “Yes. You told me that.”
 “After the explosion when the people of Pablo come around that corner, thou must fire
over their heads if others come after them. Thou must fire high above them when they
appear in any event that others must not come. Understandest thou?”
 “Why not? It is as thou saidst last night.”
 “Hast any questions?”
 “Nay. I have two sacks. I can load them from above where it will not be seen and bring
them here.”
 “But do no digging here. Thou must be as well hid as we were at the top.”
 “Nay. I will bring the dirt in them in the dark. You will see. They will not show as I will
fix them.”
 “Thou are very close. Sabes? In the daylight this clump shows clearly from below.”
 “Do not worry, Inglés. Where goest thou?”
 “I go close below with the small máquina of mine. The old man will cross the gorge
now to be ready for the box of the other end. It faces in that direction.”
 “Then nothing more,” said Agustín. “Salud, Inglés. Hast thou tobacco?”
 “Thou canst not smoke. It is too close.”
 “Nay. Just to hold in the mouth. To smoke later.”
 Robert Jordan gave him his cigarette case and Agustín took three cigarettes and put
them inside the front flap of his herdsman’s flat cap. He spread the legs of his tripod with
the gun muzzle in the low pines and commenced unpacking his load by touch and laying
the things where he wanted them.
 “Nada mas,” he said. “Well, nothing more.”
 Anselmo and Robert Jordan left him there and went back to where the packs were.
 “Where had we best leave them?” Robert Jordan whispered.
 “I think here. But canst thou be sure of the sentry with thy small máquina from here?”
 “Is this exactly where we were on that day?”
 “The same tree,” Anselmo said so low Jordan could barely hear him and he knew he
was speaking without moving his lips as he had spoken that first day. “I marked it with
my knife.”
 Robert Jordan had the feeling again of it all having happened before, but this time it
came from his own repetition of a query and Anselmo’s answer. It had been the same
with Agustín, who had asked a question about the sentries although he knew the
answer.
 “It is close enough. Even too close,” he whispered. “But the light is behind us. We are
all right here.”
 “Then I will go now to cross the gorge and be in position at the other end,” Anselmo
said. Then he said, “Pardon me, Inglés. So that there is no mistake. In case I am
stupid.”
 “What?” he breathed very softly.
 “Only to repeat it so that I will do it exactly.”
 “When I fire, thou wilt fire. When thy man is eliminated, cross the bridge to me. I will
have the packs down there and thou wilt do as I tell thee in the placing of the charges.
Everything I will tell thee. If aught happens to me do it thyself as I showed thee. Take thy
time and do it well, wedging all securely with the wooden wedges and lashing the
grenades firmly.”
 “It is all clear to me,” Anselmo said. “I remember it all. Now I go. Keep thee well
covered, Inglés, when daylight comes.”
 “When thou firest,” Robert Jordan said, “take a rest and make very sure. Do not think
of it as a man but as a target, de acuerdo? Do not shoot at the whole man but at a point.
Shoot for the exact center of the belly—if he faces thee. At the middle of the back, if he
“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway 219
is looking away. Listen, old one. When I fire if the man is sitting down he will stand up
before he runs or crouches. Shoot then. If he is still sitting down shoot. Do not wait. But
make sure. Get to within fifty yards. Thou art a hunter. Thou hast no problem.”
 “I will do as thou orderest,” Anselmo said.
 “Yes. I order it thus,” Robert Jordan said.
 I’m glad I remembered to make it an order, he thought. That helps him out. That takes
some of the curse off. I hope it does, anyway. Some of it. I had forgotten about what he
told me that first day about the killing.
 “It is thus I have ordered,” he said. “Now go.”
 “Me voy,” said Anselmo. “Until soon, Inglés.”
 “Until soon, old one,” Robert Jordan said.
 He remembered his father in the railway station and the wetness of that farewell and
he did not say Salud nor good-by nor good luck nor anything like that.
 “Hast wiped the oil from the bore of thy gun, old one?” he whispered. “So it will not
throw wild?”
 “In the cave,” Anselmo said. “I cleaned them all with the pullthrough.”
 “Then until soon,” Robert Jordan said and the old man went off, noiseless on his ropesoled shoes, swinging wide through the trees.
 Robert Jordan lay on the pine-needle floor of the forest and listened to the first stirring
in the branches of the pines of the wind that would come with daylight. He took the clip
out of the submachine gun and worked the lock back and forth. Then he turned the gun,
with the lock open and in the dark he put the muzzle to his lips and blew through the
barrel, the metal tasting greasy and oily as his tongue touched the edge of the bore. He
laid the gun across his forearm, the action up so that no pine needles or rubbish could
get in it, and shucked all the cartridges out of the clip with his thumb and onto a
handkerchief he had spread in front of him. Then, feeling each cartridge in the dark and
turning it in his fingers, he pressed and slid them one at a time back into the clip. Now
the clip was heavy again in his hand and he slid it back into the submachine gun and felt
it click home. He lay on his belly behind the pine trunk, the gun across his left forearm
and watched the point of light below him. Sometimes he could not see it and then he
knew that the man in the sentry box had moved in front of the brazier. Robert Jordan lay
there and waited for daylight.
42
 During the time that Pablo had ridden back from the hills to the cave and the time the
band had dropped down to where they had left the horses Andrés had made rapid
progress toward Golz’s headquarters. Where they came onto the main highroad to
Navacerrada on which the trucks were rolling back from the mountain there was a
control. But when Gomez showed the sentry at the control his safe-conduct from the
Lieutenant-Colonel Miranda the sentry put the light from a flashlight on it, showed it to
the other sentry with him, then handed it back and saluted.
 “Siga,” he said. “Continue. But without lights.”
 The motorcycle roared again and Andrés was holding tight onto the forward seat and
they were moving along the highway, Gomez riding carefully in the traffic. None of the
trucks had lights and they were moving down the road in a long convoy. There were
loaded trucks moving up the road too, and all of them raised a dust that Andrés could
not see in that dark but could only feel as a cloud that blew in his face and that he could
bite between his teeth.
 They were close behind the tailboard of a truck now, the motorcycle chugging, then
Gomez speeded up and passed it and another, and another, and another with the other
trucks roaring and rolling down past them on the left. There was a motorcar behind them
now and it blasted into the truck noise and the dust with its klaxon again and again; then
flashed on lights that showed the dust like a solid yellow cloud and surged past them in
a whining rise of gears and a demanding, threatening, bludgeoning of klaxoning.
“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway 220
 Then ahead all the trucks were stopped and riding on, working his way ahead past
ambulances, staff cars, an armored car, another, and a third, all halted, like heavy,
metal, gun-jutting turtles in the hot yet settled dust, they found another control where
there had been a smash-up. A truck, halting, had not been seen by the truck which
followed it and the following truck had run into it smashing the rear of the first truck in
and scattering cases of small-arms ammunition over the road. One case had burst open
on landing and as Gomez and Andrés stopped and wheeled the motorcycle forward
through the stalled vehicles to show their safe-conduct at the control Andrés walked
over the brass hulls of the thousand of cartridges scattered across the road in the dust.
The second truck had its radiator completely smashed in. The truck behind it was
touching its tail gate. A hundred more were piling up behind and an overbooted officer
was running back along the road shouting to the drivers to back so that the smashed
truck could be gotten off the road.
 There were too many trucks for them to be able to back unless the officer reached the
end of the ever mounting line and stopped it from increasing and Andrés saw him
running, stumbling, with his flashlight, shouting and cursing and, in the dark, the trucks
kept coming up.
 The man at the control would not give the safe-conduct back. There were two of them,
with rifles slung on their backs and flashlights in their hands and they were shouting too.
The one carrying the safe-conduct in his hand crossed the road to a truck going in the
downhill direction to tell it to proceed to the next control and tell them there to hold all
trucks until his jam was straightened out. The truck driver listened and went on. Then,
still holding the safeconduct, the control patrol came over, shouting, to the truck driver
whose load was spilled.
 “Leave it and get ahead for the love of God so we can clear this!” he shouted at the
driver.
 “My transmission is smashed,” the driver, who was bent over by the rear of his truck,
said.
 “Obscene your transmission. Go ahead, I say.”
 “They do not go ahead when the differential is smashed,” the driver told him and bent
down again.
 “Get thyself pulled then, get ahead so that we can get this other obscenity off the
road.”
 The driver looked at him sullenly as the control man shone the electric torch on the
smashed rear of the truck.
 “Get ahead. Get ahead,” the man shouted, still holding the safeconduct pass in his
hand.
 “And my paper,” Gomez spoke to him. “My safe-conduct. We are in a hurry.”
 “Take thy safe-conduct to hell,” the man said and handing it to him ran across the road
to halt a down-coming truck.
 “Turn thyself at the crossroads and put thyself in position to pull this wreck forward,”
he said to the driver.
 “My orders are—”
 “Obscenity thy orders. Do as I say.”
 The driver let his truck into gear and rolled straight ahead down the road and was
gone in the dust.
 As Gomez started the motorcycle ahead onto the now clear right-hand side of the road
past the wrecked truck, Andrés, holding tight again, saw the control guard halting
another truck and the driver leaning from the cab and listening to him.
 Now they went fast, swooping along the road that mounted steadily toward the
mountain. All forward traffic had been stalled at the control and there were only the
descending trucks passing, passing and passing on their left as the motorcycle climbed
fast and steadily now until it began to overtake the mounting traffic which had gone on
ahead before the disaster at the control.
 Still without lights they passed four more armored cars, then a long line of trucks
“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway 221
loaded with troops. The troops were silent in the dark and at first Andrés only felt their
presence rising above him, bulking above the truck bodies through the dust as they
passed. Then another staff came behind them blasting with its klaxon and flicking its
lights off and on, and each time the lights shone Andrés saw the troops, steel-helmeted,
their rifles vertical, their machine guns pointed up against the dark sky, etched sharp
against the night that they dropped into when the light flicked off. Once as he passed
close to a troop truck and the lights flashed he saw their faces fixed and sad in the
sudden light. In their steel helmets, riding in the trucks in the dark toward something that
they only knew was an attack, their faces were drawn with each man’s own problem in
the dark and the light revealed them as they would not have looked in day, from shame
to show it to each other, until the bombardment and the attack would commence, and no
man would think about his face.
 Andrés now passing them truck after truck, Gomez still keeping successfully ahead of
the following staff car, did not think any of this about their faces. He only thought, “What
an army. What equipment. What a mechanization. Vaya gente! Look at such people.
Here we have the army of the Republic. Look at them. Camion after camion. All
uniformed alike. All with casques of steel on their heads. Look at the máquinas rising
from the trucks against the coming of planes. Look at the army that has been builded!”
 And as the motorcycle passed the high gray trucks full of troops, gray trucks with high
square cabs and square ugly radiators, steadily mounting the road in the dust and the
flicking lights of the pursuing staff car, the red star of the army showing in the light when
it passed over the tail gates, showing when the light came onto the sides of the dusty
truck bodies, as they passed, climbing steadily now, the air colder and the road starting
to turn in bends and switchbacks now, the trucks laboring and grinding, some steaming
in the light flashes, the motorcycle laboring now too, and Andrés clinging tight to the
front seat as they climbed, Andrés thought this ride on a motorcycle was mucho, mucho.
He had never been on a motorcycle before and now they were climbing a mountain in
the midst of all the movement that was going to an attack and, as they climbed, he knew
now there was no problem of ever being back in time for the assault on the posts. In this
movement and confusion he would be lucky to get back by the next night. He had never
seen an offensive or any of the preparations for one before and as they rode up the road
he marvelled at the size and power of this army that the Republic had built.
 Now they rode on a long slanting, rising stretch of road that ran across the face of the
mountain and the grade was so steep as they neared the top that Gomez told him to get
down and together they pushed the motorcycle up the last steep grade of the pass. At
the left, just past the top, there was a loop of road where cars could turn and there were
lights winking in front of a big stone building that bulked long and dark against the night
sky.
 “Let us go to ask there where the headquarters is,” Gomez said to Andrés and they
wheeled the motorcycle over to where two sentries stood in front of the closed door of
the great stone building. Gomez leaned the motorcycle against the wall as a
motorcyclist in a leather suit, showing against the light from inside the building as the
door opened, came out of the door with a dispatch case hung over his shoulder, a
wooden-holstered Mauser pistol swung against his hip. As the light went off, he found
his motorcycle in the dark by the door, pushed it until it sputtered and caught, then
roared off up the road.
 At the door Gomez spoke to one of the sentries. “Captain Gomez of the Sixty-Fifth
Brigade,” he said. “Can you tell me where to find the headquarters of General Golz
commanding the ThirtyFifth Division?”
 “It isn’t here,” the sentry said.
 “What is here?”
 “The Comandancia.”
 “What comandancia?”
 “Well, the Comandancia.”
 “The comandancia of what?”
“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway 222
 “Who art thou to ask so many questions?” the sentry said to Gomez in the dark. Here
on the top of the pass the sky was very clear with the stars out and Andrés, out of the
dust now, could see quite clearly in the dark. Below them, where the road turned to the
right, he could see clearly the outline of the trucks and cars that passed against the sky
line.
 “I am Captain Rogelio Gomez of the first battalion of the Sixty-Fifth Brigade and I ask
where is the headquarters of General Golz,” Gomez said.
 The sentry opened the door a little way. “Call the corporal of the guard,” he shouted
inside.
 Just then a big staff car came up over the turn of the road and circled toward the big
stone building where Andrés and Gomez were standing waiting for the corporal of the
guard. It came toward them and stopped outside the door.
 A large man, old and heavy, in an oversized khaki beret, such as chasseurs a pied
wear in the French Army, wearing an overcoat, carrying a map case and wearing a
pistol strapped around his greatcoat, got out of the back of the car with two other men in
the uniform of the International Brigades.
 He spoke in French, which Andrés did not understand and of which Gomez, who had
been a barber, knew only a few words, to his chauffeur telling him to get the car away
from the door and into shelter.
 As he came into the door with the other two officers, Gomez saw his face clearly in the
light and recognized him. He had seen him at political meetings and he had often read
articles by him in Mundo Obrero translated from the French. He recognized his bushy
eyebrows, his watery gray eyes, his chin and the double chin under it, and he knew him
for one of France’s great modern revolutionary figures who had led the mutiny of the
French Navy in the Black Sea. Gomez knew this man’s high political place in the
International Brigades and he knew this man would know where Golz’s headquarters
were and be able to direct him there. He did not know what this man had become with
time, disappointment, bitterness both domestic and political, and thwarted ambition and
that to question him was one of the most dangerous things that any man could do.
Knowing nothing of this he stepped forward into the path of this man, saluted with his
clenched fist and said, “Comrade Marty, we are the bearers of a dispatch for General
Golz. Can you direct us to his headquarters? It is urgent.”
 The tall, heavy old man looked at Gomez with his outthrust head and considered him
carefully with his watery eyes. Even here at the front in the light of a bare electric bulb,
he having just come in from driving in an open car on a brisk night, his gray face had a
look of decay. His face looked as though it were modelled from the waste material you
find under the claws of a very old lion.
 “You have what, Comrade?” he asked Gomez, speaking Spanish with a strong
Catalan accent. His eyes glanced sideways at Andrés, slid over him, and went back to
Gomez.
 “A dispatch for General Golz to be delivered at his headquarters, Comrade Marty.”
 “Where is it from, Comrade?”
 “From behind the fascist lines,” Gomez said.
 André Marty extended his hand for the dispatch and the other papers. He glanced at
them and put them in his pocket.
 “Arrest them both,” he said to the corporal of the guard. “Have them searched and
bring them to me when I send for them.”
 With the dispatch in his pocket he strode on into the interior of the big stone house.
 Outside in the guard room Gomez and Andrés were being searched by the guard.
 “What passes with that man?” Gomez said to one of the guards.
 “Está loco,” the guard said. “He is crazy.”
 “No. He is a political figure of great importance,” Gomez said. “He is the chief
commissar of the International Brigades.”
 “Apesar de eso, está loco,” the corporal of the guard said. “All the same he’s crazy.
What do you behind the fascist lines?”
“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway 223
 “This comrade is a guerilla from there,” Gomez told him while the man searched him.
“He brings a dispatch to General Golz. Guard well my papers. Be careful with that
money and that bullet on the string. It is from my first wound at Guadarama.”
 “Don’t worry,” the corporal said. “Everything will be in this drawer. Why didn’t you ask
me where Golz was?”
 “We tried to. I asked the sentry and he called you.”
 “But then came the crazy and you asked him. No one should ask him anything. He is
crazy. Thy Golz is up the road three kilometers from here and to the right in the rocks of
the forest.”
 “Can you not let us go to him now?”
 “Nay. It would be my head. I must take thee to the crazy. Besides, he has thy
dispatch.”
 “Can you not tell some one?”
 “Yes,” the corporal said. “I will tell the first responsible one I see. All know that he is
crazy.”
 “I had always taken him for a great figure,” Gomez said. “For one of the glories of
France.”
 “He may be a glory and all,” the corporal said and put his hand on Andrés’s shoulder.
“But he is crazy as a bedbug. He has a mania for shooting people.”
 “Truly shooting them?”
 “Como lo oyes,” the corporal said. “That old one kills more than the bubonic plague.
Mata más que la peste bubonica. But he doesn’t kill fascists like we do. Qué va. Not in
joke. Mata bichos raros. He kills rare things. Trotzkyites. Divagationers. Any type of rare
beasts.”
 Andrés did not understand any of this.
 “When we were at Escorial we shot I don’t know how many for him,” the corporal said.
“We always furnish the firing party. The men of the Brigades would not shoot their own
men. Especially the French. To avoid difficulties it is always us who do it. We shot
French. We have shot Belgians. We have shot others of divers nationality. Of all types.
Tiene mania de fusilar gente. Always for political things. He’s crazy. Purifica más que el
Salvarsán. He purifies more than Salvarsan.”
 “But you will tell some one of this dispatch?”
 “Yes, man. Surely. I know every one of these two Brigades. Every one comes through
here. I know even up to and through the Russians, although only a few speak Spanish.
We will keep this crazy from shooting Spaniards.”
 “But the dispatch.”
 “The dispatch, too. Do not worry, Comrade. We know how to deal with this crazy. He
is only dangerous with his own people. We understand him now.”
 “Bring in the two prisoners,” came the voice of André Marty.
 “Quereis echar un trago?” the corporal asked. “Do you want a drink?”
 “Why not?”
 The corporal took a bottle of anis from a cupboard and both Gomez and Andrés drank.
So did the corporal. He wiped his mouth on his hand.
 “Vamonos,” he said.
 They went out of the guard room with the swallowed burn of the anis warming their
mouths, their bellies and their hearts and walked down the hall and entered the room
where Marty sat behind a long table, his map spread in front of him, his red-and-blue
pencil, with which he played at being a general officer, in his hand. To Andrés it was
only one more thing. There had been many tonight. There were always many. If your
papers were in order and your heart was good you were in no danger. Eventually they
turned you loose and you were on your way. But the Inglés had said to hurry. He knew
now he could never get back for the bridge but they had a dispatch to deliver and this
old man there at the table had put it in his pocket.
 “Stand there,” Marty said without looking up.
 “Listen, Comrade Marty,” Gomez broke out, the anis fortifying his anger. “Once tonight
“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway 224
we have been impeded by the ignorance of the anarchists. Then by the sloth of a
bureaucratic fascist. Now by the oversuspicion of a Communist.”
 “Close your mouth,” Marty said without looking up. “This is not a meeting.”
 “Comrade Marty, this is a matter of utmost urgence,” Gomez said. “Of the greatest
importance.”
 The corporal and the soldier with them were taking a lively interest in this as though
they were at a play they had seen many times but whose excellent moments they could
always savor.
 “Everything is of urgence,” Marty said. “All things are of importance.” Now he looked
up at them, holding the pencil. “How did you know Golz was here? Do you understand
how serious it is to come asking for an individual general before an attack? How could
you know such a general would be here?”
 “Tell him, tu,” Gomez said to Andrés.
 “Comrade General,” Andrés started—André Marty did not correct him in the mistake in
rank—”I was given that packet on the other side of the lines—”
 “On the other side of the lines?” Marty said. “Yes, I heard him say you came from the
fascist lines.”
 “It was given to me, Comrade General, by an Inglés named Roberto who had come to
us as a dynamiter for this of the bridge. Understandeth?”
 “Continue thy story,” Marty said to Andrés; using the term story as you would say lie,
falsehood, or fabrication.
 “Well, Comrade General, the Inglés told me to bring it to the General Golz with all
speed. He makes an attack in these hills now on this day and all we ask is to take it to
him now promptly if it pleases the Comrade General.”
 Marty shook his head again. He was looking at Andrés but he was not seeing him.
 Golz, he thought in a mixture of horror and exultation as a man might feel hearing that
a business enemy had been killed in a particularly nasty motor accident or that some
one you hated but whose probity you had never doubted had been guilty of defalcation.
That Golz should be one of them, too. That Golz should be in such obvious
communication with the fascists. Golz that he had known for nearly twenty years. Golz
who had captured the gold train that winter with Lucacz in Siberia. Golz who had fought
against Kolchak, and in Poland. In the Caucasus. In China, and here since the first
October. But he had been close to Tukachevsky. To Voroshilov, yes, too. But to
Tukachevsky. And to who else? Here to Karkov, of course. And to Lucacz. But all the
Hungarians had been intriguers. He hated Gall. Golz hated Gall. Remember that. Make
a note of that. Golz has always hated Gall. But he favors Putz. Remember that. And
Duval is his chief of staff. See what stems from that. You’ve heard him say Copic’s a
fool. That is definitive. That exists. And now this dispatch from the fascist lines. Only by
pruning out of these rotten branches can the tree remain healthy and grow. The rot must
become apparent for it is to be destroyed. But Golz of all men. That Golz should be one
of the traitors. He knew that you could trust no one. No one. Ever. Not your wife. Not
your brother. Not your oldest comrade. No one. Ever.
 “Take them away,” he said to the guards. “Guard them carefully.” The corporal looked
at the soldier. This had been very quiet for one of Marty’s performances.
 “Comrade Marty,” Gomez said. “Do not be insane. Listen to me, a loyal officer and
comrade. That is a dispatch that must be delivered. This comrade has brought it through
the fascist lines to give to Comrade General Golz.”
 “Take them away,” Marty said, now kindly, to the guard. He was sorry for them as
human beings if it should be necessary to liquidate them. But it was the tragedy of Golz
that oppressed him. That it should be Golz, he thought. He would take the fascist
communication at once to Varloff. No, better he would take it to Golz himself and watch
him as he received it. That was what he would do. How could he be sure of Varloff if
Golz was one of them? No. This was a thing to be very careful about.
 Andrés turned to Gomez, “You mean he is not going to send the dispatch?” he asked,
unbelieving.
“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway 225
 “Don’t you see?” Gomez said.
 “Me cago en su puta madre!” Andrés said. “Está loco.”
 “Yes,” Gomez said. “He is crazy. You are crazy! Hear! Crazy!” he shouted at Marty
who was back now bending over the map with his red-and-blue pencil. “Hear me, you
crazy murderer?”
 “Take them away,” Marty said to the guard. “Their minds are unhinged by their great
guilt.”
 There was a phrase the corporal recognized. He had heard that before.
 “You crazy murderer!” Gomez shouted.
 “Hijo de la gran puta,” Andrés said to him. “Loco.”
 The stupidity of this man angered him. If he was a crazy let him be removed as a
crazy. Let the dispatch be taken from his pocket. God damn this crazy to hell. His heavy
Spanish anger was rising out of his usual calm and good temper. In a little while it would
blind him.
 Marty, looking at his map, shook his head sadly as the guards took Gomez and
Andrés out. The guards had enjoyed hearing him cursed but on the whole they had
been disappointed in the performance. They had seen much better ones. André Marty
did not mind the men cursing him. So many men had cursed him at the end. He was
always genuinely sorry for them as human beings. He always told himself that and it
was one of the last true ideas that was left to him that had ever been his own.
 He sat there, his moustache and his eyes focused on the map, on the map that he
never truly understood, on the brown tracing of the contours that were traced fine and
concentric as a spider’s web. He could see the heights and the valleys from the
contours but he never really understood why it should be this height and why this valley
was the one. But at the General Staff where, because of the system of Political
Commissars, he could intervene as the political head of the Brigades, he would put his
finger on such and such a numbered, brown-thin-lined encircled spot among the greens
of woods cut by the lines of roads that parallel the never casual winding of a river and
say, “There. That is the point of weakness.”
 Gall and Copic, who were men of politics and of ambition, would agree and later, men
who never saw the map, but heard the number of the hill before they left their starting
place and had the earth of diggings on it pointed out, would climb its side to find their
death along its slope or, being halted by machine guns placed in olive groves would
never get up it at all. Or on other fronts they might scale it easily and be no better off
than they had been before. But when Marty put his finger on the map in Golz’s staff the
scarheaded, white-faced General’s jaw muscles would tighten and he would think, “I
should shoot you, André Marty, before I let you put that gray rotten finger on a contour
map of mine. Damn you to hell for all the men you’ve killed by interfering in matters you
know nothing of. Damn the day they named tractor factories and villages and cooperatives for you so that you are a symbol that I cannot touch. Go and suspect and
exhort and intervene and denounce and butcher some other place and leave my staff
alone.”
 But instead of saying that Golz would only lean back away from the leaning bulk, the
pushing finger, the watery gray eyes, the graywhite moustache and the bad breath and
say, “Yes, Comrade Marty. I see your point. It is not well taken, however, and I do not
agree. You can try to go over my head if you like. Yes. You can make it a Party matter
as you say. But I do not agree.”
 So now André Marty sat working over his map at the bare table with the raw light on
the unshaded electric light bulb over his head, the overwide beret pulled forward to
shade his eyes, referring to the mimeographed copy of the orders for the attack and
slowly and laboriously working them out on the map as a young officer might work a
problem at a staff college. He was engaged in war. In his mind he was commanding
troops; he had the right to interfere and this he believed to constitute command. So he
sat there with Robert Jordan’s dispatch to Golz in his pocket and Gomez and Andrés
waited in the guard room and Robert Jordan lay in the woods above the bridge.
“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway 226
 It is doubtful if the outcome of Andrés’s mission would have been any different if he
and Gomez had been allowed to proceed without André Marty’s hindrance. There was
no one at the front with sufficient authority to cancel the attack. The machinery had been
in motion much too long for it to be stopped suddenly now. There is a great inertia about
all military operations of any size. But once this inertia has been overcome and
movement is under way they are almost as hard to arrest as to initiate.
 But on this night the old man, his beret pulled forward, was still sitting at the table with
his map when the door opened and Karkov the Russian journalist came in with two
other Russians in civilian clothes, leather coats and caps. The corporal of the guard
closed the door reluctantly behind them. Karkov had been the first responsible man he
had been able to communicate with.
 “Tovarich Marty,” said Karkov in his politely disdainful lisping voice and smiled,
showing his bad teeth.
 Marty stood up. He did not like Karkov, but Karkov, coming from Pravda and in direct
communication with Stalin, was at this moment one of the three most important men in
Spain.
 “Tovarich Karkov,” he said.
 “You are preparing the attack?” Karkov said insolently, nodding toward the map.
 “I am studying it,” Marty answered.
 “Are you attacking? Or is it Golz?” Karkov asked smoothly.
 “I am only a commissar, as you know,” Marty told him.
 “No,” Karkov said. “You are modest. You are really a general. You have your map and
your field glasses. But were you not an admiral once, Comrade Marty?”
 “I was a gunner’s mate,” said Marty. It was a lie. He had really been a chief yeoman at
the time of the mutiny. But he thought now, always, that he had been a gunner’s mate.
 “Ah. I thought you were a first-class yeoman,” Karkov said. “I always get my facts
wrong. It is the mark of the journalist.”
 The other Russians had taken no part in the conversation. They were both looking
over Marty’s shoulder at the map and occasionally making a remark to each other in
their own language. Marty and Karkov spoke French after the first greeting.
 “It is better not to get facts wrong in Pravda,” Marty said. He said it brusquely to build
himself up again. Karkov always punctured him. The French word is dégonfler and
Marty was worried and made wary by him. It was hard, when Karkov spoke, to
remember with what importance he, André Marty, came from the Central Committee of
the French Communist Party. It was hard to remember, too, that he was untouchable.
Karkov seemed always to touch him so lightly and whenever he wished. Now Karkov
said, “I usually correct them before I send them to Pravda, I am quite accurate in
Pravda. Tell me, Comrade Marty, have you heard anything of any message coming
through for Golz from one of our partizan groups operating toward Segovia? There is an
American comrade there named Jordan that we should have heard from. There have
been reports of fighting there behind the fascist lines. He would have sent a message
through to Golz.”
 “An American?” Marty asked. Andrés had said an Inglés. So that is what it was. So he
had been mistaken. Why had those fools spoken to him anyway?”
 “Yes,” Karkov looked at him contemptuously, “a young American of slight political
development but a great way with the Spaniards and a fine partizan record. Just give
me the dispatch, Comrade Marty. It has been delayed enough.”
 “What dispatch?” Marty asked. It was a very stupid thing to say and he knew it. But he
was not able to admit he was wrong that quickly and he said it anyway to delay the
moment of humiliation, not accepting any humiliation. “And the safe-conduct pass,”
Karkov said through his bad teeth.
 André Marty put his hand in his pocket and laid the dispatch on the table. He looked
Karkov squarely in the eye. All right. He was wrong and there was nothing he could do
about it now but he was not accepting any humiliation. “And the safe-conduct pass,”
Karkov said softly.
“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway 227
 Marty laid it beside the dispatch.
 “Comrade Corporal,” Karkov called in Spanish.
 The corporal opened the door and came in. He looked quickly at André Marty, who
stared back at him like an old boar which has been brought to bay by hounds. There
was no fear on Marty’s face and no humiliation. He was only angry, and he was only
temporarily at bay. He knew these dogs could never hold him.
 “Take these to the two comrades in the guard room and direct them to General Golz’s
headquarters,” Karkov said. “There has been too much delay.”
 The corporal went out and Marty looked after him, then looked at Karkov.
 “Tovarich Marty,” Karkov said, “I am going to find out just how untouchable you are.”
 Marty looked straight at him and said nothing.
 “Don’t start to have any plans about the corporal, either,” Karkov went on. “It was not
the corporal. I saw the two men in the guard room and they spoke to me” (this was a
lie). “I hope all men always will speak to me” (this was the truth although it was the
corpora! who had spoken). But Karkov had this belief in the good which could come
from his own accessibility and the humanizing possibility of benevolent intervention. It
was the one thing he was never cynical about.
 “You know when I am in the U.S.S.R. people write to me in Pravda when there is an
injustice in a town in Azerbaijan. Did you know that? They say ‘Karkov will help us.”
 André Marty looked at him with no expression on his face except anger and dislike.
There was nothing in his mind now but that Karkov had done something against him. All
right, Karkov, power and all, could watch out.
 “This is something else,” Karkov went on, “but it is the same principle. I am going to
find Out just how untouchable you are, Comrade Marty. I would like to know if it could
not be possible to change the name of that tractor factory.”
 André Marty looked away from him and back to the map.
 “What did young Jordan say?” Karkov asked him.
 “I did not read it,” André Marty said. “Et maintenant fiche moi la paix, Comrade
Karkov.”
 “Good,” said Karkov. “I leave you to your military labors.”
 He stepped out of the room and walked to the guard room. Andrés and Gomez were
already gone and he stood there a moment looking up the road and at the mountain
tops beyond that showed now in the first gray of daylight. We must get on up there, he
thought. It will be soon, now.
 Andrés and Gomez were on the motorcycle on the road again and it was getting light.
Now Andrés, holding again to the back of the seat ahead of him as the motorcycle
climbed turn after switchback turn in a faint gray mist that lay over the top of the pass,
felt the motorcycle speed under him, then skid and stop and they were standing by the
motorcycle on a long, down-slope of road and in the woods, on their left, were tanks
covered with pine branches. There were troops here all through the woods. Andrés saw
men carrying the long poles of stretchers over their shoulders. Three staff cars were off
the road to the right, in under the trees, with branches laid against their sides and other
pine branches over their tops.
 Gomez wheeled the motorcycle up to one of them. He leaned it against a pine tree
and spoke to the chauffeur who was sitting by the car, his back against a tree.
 “I’ll take you to him,” the chauffeur said. “Put thy moto out of sight and cover it with
these.” He pointed to a pile of cut branches.
 With the sun just starting to come through the high branches of the pine trees, Gomez
and Andrés followed the chauffeur, whose name was Vicente, through the pines across
the road and up the slope to the entrance of a dugout from the roof of which signal wires
ran on up over the wooded slope. They stood outside while the chauffeur went in and
Andrés admired the construction of the dugout which showed only as a hole in the
hillside, with no dirt scattered about, but which he could see, from the entrance, was
both deep and profound with men moving around in it freely with no need to duck their
heads under the heavy timbered roof.
“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway 228
 Vicente, the chauffeur, came out.
 “He is up above where they are deploying for the attack,” he said. “I gave it to his
Chief of Staff. He signed for it. Here.”
 He handed Gomez the receipted envelope. Gomez gave it to Andrés, who looked at it
and put it inside his shirt.
 “What is the name of him who signed?” he asked.
 “Duval,” Vicente said.
 “Good,” said Andrés. “He was one of the three to whom I might give it.”
 “Should we wait for an answer?” Gomez asked Andrés.
 “It might be best. Though where I will find the Inglés and the others after that of the
bridge neither God knows.”
 “Come wait with me,” Vicente said, “until the General returns. And I will get thee
coffee. Thou must be hungry.”
 “And these tanks,” Gomez said to him.
 They were passing the branch-covered, mud-colored tanks, each with two deepridged tracks over the pine needles showing where they had swung and backed from
the road. Their 45-mm. guns jutted horizontally under the branches and the drivers and
gunners in their leather coats and ridged helmets sat with their backs against the trees
or lay sleeping on the ground.
 “These are the reserve,” Vicente said. “Also these troops are in reserve. Those who
commence the attack are above.”
 “They are many,” Andrés said.
 “Yes,” Vicente said. “It is a full division.”
 Inside the dugout Duval, holding the opened dispatch from Robert Jordan in his left
hand, glancing at his wrist watch on the same hand, reading the dispatch for the fourth
time, each time feeling the sweat come out from under his armpit and run down his
flank, said into the telephone, “Get me position Segovia, then. He’s left? Get me position
Avila.”
 He kept on with the phone. It wasn’t any good. He had talked to both brigades. Golz
had been up to inspect the dispositions for the attack and was on his way to an
observation post. He called the observation post and he was not there.
 “Get me planes one,” Duval said, suddenly taking all responsibility. He would take
responsibility for holding it up. It was better to hold it up. You could not send them to a
surprise attack against an enemy that was waiting for it. You couldn’t do it. It was just
murder. You couldn’t. You mustn’t. No matter what. They could shoot him if they
wanted. He would call the airfield directly and get the bombardment cancelled. But
suppose it’s just a holding attack? Suppose we were supposed to draw off all that
material and those forces? Suppose that is what it is for? They never tell you it is a
holding attack when you make it.
 “Cancel the call to planes one,” he told the signaller. “Get me the Sixty-Ninth Brigade
observation post.”
 He was still calling there when he heard the first sound of the planes.
 It was just then he got through to the observation post.
 “Yes,” Golz said quietly.
 He was sitting leaning back against the sandbag, his feet against a rock, a cigarette
hung from his lower lip and he was looking up and over his shoulder while he was
talking. He was seeing the expanding wedges of threes, silver and thundering in the sky
that were coming over the far shoulder of the mountain where the first sun was striking.
He watched them come shining and beautiful in the sun. He saw the twin circles of light
where the sun shone on the propellers as they came.
 “Yes,” he said into the telephone, speaking in French because it was Duval on the
wire. “Nous sommes foutus. Oui. Comme toujours. Oui. C’est dommage. Oui. It’s a
shame it came too late.”
 His eyes, watching the planes coming, were very proud. He saw the red wing
markings now and he watched their steady, stately roaring advance. This was how it
“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway 229
could be. These were our planes. They had come, crated on ships, from the Black Sea
through the Straits of Marmora, through the Dardanelles, through the Mediterranean and
to here, unloaded lovingly at Alicante, assembled ably, tested and found perfect and
now flown in lovely hammering precision, the V’s tight and pure as they came now high
and silver in the morning sun to blast those ridges across there and blow them roaring
high so that we can go through.
 Golz knew that once they had passed overhead and on, the bombs would fall, looking
like porpoises in the air as they tumbled. And then the ridge tops would spout and roar
in jumping clouds and disappear in one great blowing cloud. Then the tanks would grind
clanking up those two slopes and after them would go his two brigades. And if it had
been a surprise they could go on and down and over and through, pausing, cleaning up,
dealing with, much to do, much to be done intelligently with the tanks helping, with the
tanks wheeling and returning, giving covering fire and others bringing the attackers up
then slipping on and over and through and pushing down beyond. This was how it would
be if there was no treason and if all did what they should.
 There were the two ridges, and there were the tanks ahead and there were his two
good brigades ready to leave the woods and here came the planes now. Everything he
had to do had been done as it should be.
 But as he watched the planes, almost up to him now, he felt sick at his stomach for he
knew from having heard Jordan’s dispatch over the phone that there would be no one
on those two ridges. They’d be withdrawn a little way below in narrow trenches to
escape the fragments, or hiding in the timber and when the bombers passed they’d get
back up there with their machine guns and their automatic weapons and the anti-tank
guns Jordan had said went up the road, and it would be one famous balls up more. But
the planes, now coming deafeningly, were how it could have been and Golz watching
them, looking up, said into the telephone, “No. Rien a faire. Rien. Faut pas penser. Faut
accepter.”
 Golz watched the planes with his hard proud eyes that knew how things could be and
how they would be instead and said, proud of how they could be, believing in how they
could be, even if they never were, “Bon. Nous ferons notre petit possible,” and hung up.
 But Duval did not hear him. Sitting at the table holding the receiver, all he heard was
the roar of the planes and he thought, now, maybe this time, listen to them come,
maybe the bombers will blow them all off, maybe we will get a break-through, maybe he
will get the reserves he asked for, maybe this is it, maybe this is the time. Go on. Come
on. Go on. The roar was such that he could not hear what he was thinking.
43
 Robert Jordan lay behind the trunk of a pine tree on the slope of the hill above the
road and the bridge and watched it become daylight. He loved this hour of the day
always and now he watched it; feeling it gray within him, as though he were a part of the
slow lightening that comes before the rising of the sun; when solid things darken and
space lightens and the lights that have shone in the night go yellow and then fade as the
day comes. The pine trunks below him were hard and clear now, their trunks solid and
brown and the road was shiny with a wisp of mist over it. The dew had wet him and the
forest floor was soft and he felt the give of the brown, dropped pine needles under his
elbows. Below he saw, through the light mist that rose from the stream bed, the steel of
the bridge, straight and rigid across the gap, with the wooden sentry boxes at each end.
But as he looked the structure of the bridge was still spidery and fine in the mist that
hung over the stream.
 He saw the sentry now in his box as he stood, his back with the hanging blanket coat
topped by the steel casque on his head showing as he leaned forward over the holepunched petrol tin of the brazier, warming his hands. Robert Jordan heard the stream,
far down in the rocks, and he saw a faint, thin smoke that rose from the sentry box.
 He looked at his watch and thought, I wonder if Andrés got through to Golz? If we are
“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway 230
going to blow it I would like to breathe very slowly and slow up the time again and feel it.
Do you think he made it? Andrés? And if he did would they call it off? If they had time to
call it off? Qué va. Do not worry. They will or they won’t. There are no more decisions
and in a little while you will know. Suppose the attack is successful. Golz said it could
be. That there was a possibility. With our tanks coming down that road, the people
coming through from the right and down and past La Granja and the whole left of the
mountains turned. Why don’t you ever think of how it is to win? You’ve been on the
defensive for so long that you can’t think of that. Sure. But that was before all that stuff
went up this road. That was before all the planes came. Don’t be so naïve. But
remember this that as long as we can hold them here we keep the fascists tied up. They
can’t attack any other country until they finish with us and they can never finish with us.
If the French help at all, if only they leave the frontier open and if we get planes from
America they can never finish with us. Never, if we get anything at all. These people will
fight forever if they’re well armed.
 No you must not expect victory here, not for several years maybe. This is just a
holding attack. You must not get illusions about it now. Suppose we got a break-through
today? This is our first big attack. Keep your sense of proportion. But what if we should
have it? Don’t get excited, he told himself. Remember what went up the road. You’ve
done what you could about that. We should have portable short-wave sets, though. We
will, in time. But we haven’t yet. You just watch now and do what you should.
 Today is only one day in all the days that will ever be. But what will happen in all the
other days that ever come can depend on what you do today. It’s been that way all this
year. It’s been that way so many times. All of this war is that way. You are getting very
pompous in the early morning, he told himself. Look there what’s coming now.
 He saw the two men in blanket capes and steel helmets come around the corner of
the road walking toward the bridge, their rifles slung over their shoulders. One stopped
at the far end of the bridge and was out of sight in the sentry box. The other came on
across the bridge, walking slowly and heavily. He stopped on the bridge and spat into
the gorge, then came on slowly to the near end of the bridge where the other sentry
spoke to him and then started off back over the bridge. The sentry who was relieved
walked faster than the other had done (because he’s going to coffee, Robert Jordan
thought) but he too spat down into the gorge.
 I wonder if that is superstition? Robert Jordan thought. I’ll have to take me a spit in
that gorge too. If I can spit by then. No. It can’t be very powerful medicine. It can’t work.
I’ll have to prove it doesn’t work before I am out there.
 The new sentry had gone inside the box and sat down. His rifle with the bayonet fixed
was leaning against the wall. Robert Jordan took his glasses from his shirt pocket and
turned the eyepieces until the end of the bridge showed sharp and gray-painted-metal
clear. Then he moved them onto the sentry box.
 The sentry sat leaning against the wall. His helmet hung on a peg and his face
showed clearly. Robert Jordan saw he was the same man who had been there on guard
two days before in the afternoon watch. He was wearing the same knitted stocking-cap.
And he had not shaved. His cheeks were sunken and his cheekbones prominent. He
had bushy eyebrows that grew together in the center. He looked sleepy and as Robert
Jordan watched him he yawned. Then he took out a tobacco pouch and a packet of
papers and rolled himself a cigarette. He tried to make a lighter work and finally put it in
his pocket and went over to the brazier, leaned over, reached inside, brought up a piece
of charcoal, juggled it in one hand while he blew on it, then lit the cigarette and tossed
the lump of charcoal back into the brazier.
 Robert Jordan, looking through the Zeiss 8-power glasses, watched his face as he
leaned against the wall of the sentry box drawing on the cigarette. Then he took the
glasses down, folded them together and put them in his pocket.
 I won’t look at him again, he told himself.
 He lay there and watched the road and tried not to think at all. A squirrel chittered from
a pine tree below him and Robert Jordan watched the squirrel come down the tree
“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway 231
trunk, stopping on his way down to turn his head and look toward where the man was
watching. He saw the squirrel’s eyes, small and bright, and watched his tail jerk in
excitement. Then the squirrel crossed to another tree, moving on the ground in long,
small-pawed, tail-exaggerated bounds. On the tree trunk he looked back at Robert
Jordan, then pulled himself around the trunk and out of sight. Then Robert Jordan heard
the squirrel chitter from a high branch of the pine tree and he watched him there, spread
flat along the branch, his tail jerking.
 Robert Jordan looked down through the pines to the sentry box again. He would like to
have had the squirrel with him in his pocket. He would like to have had anything that he
could touch. He rubbed his elbows against the pine needles but it was not the same.
Nobody knows how lonely you can be when you do this. Me, though, I know. I hope that
Rabbit will get out of this all right. Stop that now. Yes, sure. But I can hope that and I do.
That I blow it well and that she gets out all right. Good. Sure. Just that. That is all I want
now.
 He lay there now and looked away from the road and the sentry box and across to the
far mountain. Just do not think at all, he told himself. He lay there quietly and watched
the morning come. It was a fine early summer morning and it came very fast now in the
end of May. Once a motorcyclist in a leather coat and all-leather helmet with an
automatic rifle in a holster by his left leg came across the bridge and went on up the
road. Once an ambulance crossed the bridge, passed below him, and went up the road.
But that was all. He smelled the pines and he heard the stream and the bridge showed
clear now and beautiful in the morning light. He lay there behind the pine tree, with the
submachine gun across his left forearm, and he never looked at the sentry box again
until, long after it seemed that it was never coming, that nothing could happen on such a
lovely late May morning, he heard the sudden, clustered, thudding of the bombs.
 As he heard the bombs, the first thumping noise of them, before the echo of them
came back in thunder from the mountain, Robert Jordan drew in a long breath and lifted
the submachine gun from where it lay. His arm felt stiff from its weight and his fingers
were heavy with reluctance.
 The man in the sentry box stood up when he heard the bombs. Robert Jordan saw
him reach for his rifle and step forward out of the box listening. He stood in the road with
the sun shining on him. The knitted cap was on the side of his head and the sun was on
his unshaved face as he looked up into the sky toward where the planes were bombing.
 There was no mist on the road now and Robert Jordan saw the man, clearly and
sharply, standing there on the road looking up at the sky. The sun shone bright on him
through the trees.
 Robert Jordan felt his own breath tight now as though a strand of wire bound his chest
and, steadying his elbows, feeling the corrugations of the forward grip against his
fingers, he put the oblong of the foresight, settled now in the notch of the rear, onto the
center of the man’s chest and squeezed the trigger gently.
 He felt the quick, liquid, spastic lurching of the gun against his shoulder and on the
road the man, looking surprised and hurt, slid forward on his knees and his forehead
doubled to the road. His rifle fell by him and lay there with one of the man’s fingers
twisted through the trigger guard, his wrist bent forward. The rifle lay, bayonet forward
on the road. Robert Jordan looked away from the man lying with his head doubled under
on the road to the bridge, and the sentry box at the other end. He could not see the
other sentry and he looked down the slope to the right where he knew Agustín was
hidden. Then he heard Anselmo shoot, the shot smashing an echo back from the gorge.
Then he heard him shoot again.
 With that second shot came the cracking boom of grenades from around the corner
below the bridge. Then there was the noise of grenades from well up the road to the left.
Then he heard rifle-firing up the road and from below came the noise of Pablo’s cavalry
automatic rifle spat-spat-spat-spatting into the noise of grenades. He saw Anselmo
scrambling down the steep cut to the far end of the bridge and he slung the submachine
gun over his shoulder and picked up the two heavy packs from behind the pine trunks
“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway 232
and with one in each hand, the packs pulling his arms so that he felt the tendons would
pull out of his shoulders, he ran lurching down the steep slope to the road.
 As he ran he heard Agustín shouting, “Buena caza, Inglés. Buena caza!” and he
thought, “Nice hunting, like hell, nice hunting,” and just then he heard Anselmo shoot at
the far end of the bridge, the noise of the shot clanging in the steel girders. He passed
the sentry where he lay and ran onto the bridge, the packs swinging.
 The old man came running toward him, holding his carbine in one hand. “Sin
novedad,” he shouted. “There’s nothing wrong. Tuve que rematarlo. I had to finish him.”
 Robert Jordan, kneeling, opening the packs in the center of the bridge taking out his
material, saw that tears were running down Anselmo’s cheeks through the gray beard
stubble.
 “Yo maté uno tambien,” he said to Anselmo. “I killed one too,” and jerked his head
toward where the sentry lay hunched over in the road at the end of the bridge.
 “Yes, man, yes,” Anselmo said. “We have to kill them and we kill them.”
 Robert Jordan was climbing down into the framework of the bridge. The girders were
cold and wet with dew under his hands and he climbed carefully, feeling the sun on his
back, bracing himself in a bridge truss, hearing the noise of the tumbling water below
him, hearing firing, too much firing, up the road at the upper post. He was sweating
heavily now and it was cool under the bridge. He had a coil of wire around one arm and
a pair of pliers hung by a thong from his wrist.
 “Hand me that down a package at a time, viejo,” he called up to Anselmo. The old
man leaned far over the edge handing down the oblong blocks of explosive and Robert
Jordan reached up for them, shoved them in where he wanted them, packed them
close, braced them, “Wedges, viejo! Give me wedges!” smelling the fresh shingle smell
of the new whittled wedges as he tapped them in tight to hold the charge between the
girders.
 Now as he worked, placing, bracing, wedging, lashing tight with wire, thinking only of
demolition, working fast and skillfully as a surgeon works, he heard a rattle of firing from
below on the road. Then there was the noise of a grenade. Then another, booming
through the rushing noise the water made. Then it was quiet from that direction.
 “Damn,” he thought. “I wonder what hit them then?”
 There was still firing up the road at the upper post. Too damned much firing, and he
was lashing two grenades side by side on top of the braced blocks of explosive, winding
wire over their corrugations so they would hold tight and firm and lashing it tight; twisting
it with the pliers. He felt of the whole thing and then, to make it more solid, tapped in a
wedge above the grenades that blocked the whole charge firmly in against the steel.
 “The other side now, viejo,” he shouted up to Anselmo and climbed across through the
trestling, like a bloody Tarzan in a rolled steel forest, he thought, and then coming out
from under the dark, the stream tumbling below him, he looked up and saw Anselmo’s
face as he reached the packages of explosive down to him. Goddamn good face, he
thought. Not crying now. That’s all to the good. And one side done. This side now and
we’re done. This will drop it like what all. Come on. Don’t get excited. Do it. Clean and
fast as the last one. Don’t fumble with it. Take your time. Don’t try to do it faster than you
can. You can’t lose now. Nobody can keep you from blowing one side now. You’re doing
it just the way you should. This is a cool place. Christ, it feels cool as a wine cellar and
there’s no crap. Usually working under a stone bridge it’s full of crap. This is a dream
bridge. A bloody dream bridge. It’s the old man on top who’s in a bad spot. Don’t try to
do it faster than you can. I wish that shooting would be over up above. “Give me some
wedges, viejo.” I don’t like that shooting still. Pilar has got in trouble there. Some of the
post must have been out. Out back; or behind the mill. They’re still shooting. That
means there’s somebody still at the mill. And all that damned sawdust. Those big piles
of sawdust. Sawdust, when it’s old and packed, is good stuff to fight behind. There must
be several of them still. It’s quiet below with Pablo. I wonder what that second flare-up
was. It must have been a car or a motorcyclist. I hope to God they don’t have any
armored cars come up or any tanks. Go on. Put it in just as fast as you can and wedge it
“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway 233
tight and lash it fast. You’re shaking, like a Goddamn woman. What the hell is the matter
with you? You’re trying to do it too fast. I’ll bet that Goddamn woman up above isn’t
shaking. That Pilar. Maybe she is too. She sounds as though she were in plenty trouble.
She’ll shake if she gets in enough. Like everybody bloody else.
 He leaned out and up into the sunlight and as he reached his hand up to take what
Anselmo handed him, his head now above the noise of the falling water, the firing
increased sharply up the road and then the noise of grenades again. Then more
grenades.
 “They rushed the sawmill then.”
 It’s lucky I’ve got this stuff in blocks, he thought. Instead of sticks. What the hell. It’s
just neater. Although a lousy canvas sack full of jelly would be quicker. Two sacks. No.
One of that would do. And if we just had detonators and the old exploder. That son of a
bitch threw my exploder in the river. That old box and the places that it’s been. In this
river he threw it. That bastard Pablo. He gave them hell there below just now. “Give me
some more of that, viejo.”
 The old man’s doing very well. He’s in quite a place up there. He hated to shoot that
sentry. So did I but I didn’t think about it. Nor do I think about it now. You have to do
that. But then Anselmo got a cripple. I know about cripples. I think that killing a man with
an automatic weapon makes it easier. I mean on the one doing it. It is different. After the
first touch it is it that does it. Not you. Save that to go into some other time. You and
your head. You have a nice thinking head old Jordan. Roll Jordan, Roll! They used to
yell that at football when you lugged the ball. Do you know the damned Jordan is really
not much bigger than that creek down there below. At the source, you mean. So is
anything else at the source. This is a place here under this bridge. A home away from
home. Come on Jordan, pull yourself together. This is serious Jordan. Don’t you
understand? Serious. It’s less so all the time. Look at that other side. Para qué? I’m all
right now however she goes. As Maine goes, so goes the nation. As Jordan goes so go
the bloody Israelites. The bridge, I mean. As Jordan goes, so goes the bloody bridge,
other way around, really.
 “Give me some more of that, Anselmo old boy,” he said. The old man nodded. “Almost
through,” Robert Jordan said. The old man nodded again.
 Finishing wiring the grenades down, he no longer heard the firing from up the road.
Suddenly he was working only with the noise of the stream. He looked down and saw it
boiling up white below him through the boulders and then dropping down to a clear
pebbled pool where one of the wedges he had dropped swung around in the current. As
he looked a trout rose for some insect and made a circle on the surface close to where
the chip was turning. As he twisted the wire tight with the pliers that held these two
grenades in place, he saw, through the metal of the bridge, the sunlight on the green
slope of the mountain. It was brown three days ago, he thought.
 Out from the cool dark under the bridge he leaned into the bright sun and shouted to
Anselmo’s bending face, “Give me the big coil of wire.”
 The old man handed it down.
 For God’s sake don’t loosen them any yet. This will pull them. I wish you could string
them through. But with the length of wire you are using it’s O.K., Robert Jordan thought
as he felt the cotter pins that held the rings that would release the levers on the hand
grenades. He checked that the grenades, lashed on their sides, had room for the levers
to spring when the pins were pulled (the wire that lashed them ran through under the
levers), then he attached a length of wire to one ring, wired it onto the main wire that ran
to the ring of the outside grenade, paid off some slack from the coil and passed it
around a steel brace and then handed the coil up to Anselmo. “Hold it carefully,” he
said.
 He climbed up onto the bridge, took the coil from the old man and walked back as fast
as he could pay out wire toward where the sentry was slumped in the road, leaning over
the side of the bridge and paying out wire from the coil as he walked.
 “Bring the sacks,” he shouted to Anselmo as he walked backwards. As he passed he
“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway 234
stooped down and picked up the submachine gun and slung it over his shoulder again.
 It was then, looking up from paying out wire, that he saw, well up the road, those who
were coming back from the upper post.
 There were four of them, he saw, and then he had to watch his wire so it would be
clear and not foul against any of the outer work of the bridge. Eladio was not with them.
 Robert Jordan carried the wire clear past the end of the bridge, took a ioop around the
last stanchion and then ran along the road until he stopped beside a stone marker. He
cut the wire and handed it to Anselmo.
 “Hold this, viejo,” he said. “Now walk back with me to the bridge. Take up on it as you
walk. No. I will.”
 At the bridge he pulled the wire back out through the hitch so it now ran clear and
unfouled to the grenade rings and handed it, stretching alongside the bridge but running
quite clear, to Anselmo.
 “Take this back to that high stone,” he said. “Hold it easily but firmly. Do not put any
force on it. When thou pullest hard, hard, the bridge will blow. Comprendes?”
 “Yes.”
 “Treat it softly but do not let it sag so it will foul. Keep it lightly firm but not pulling until
thou pullest. Comprendes?”
 “Yes.”
 “When thou pullest really pull. Do not jerk.”
 Robert Jordan while he spoke was looking up the road at the remainder of Pilar’s
band. They were close now and he saw Primitivo and Rafael were supporting Fernando.
He looked to be shot through the groin for he was holding himself there with both hands
while the man and the boy held him on either side. His right leg was dragging, the side
of the shoe scraping on the road as they walked him. Pilar was climbing the bank into
the timber carrying three rifles. Robert Jordan could not see her face but her head was
up and she was climbing as fast as she could.
 “How does it go?” Primitivo called.
 “Good. We’re almost finished,” Robert Jordan shouted back.
 There was no need to ask how it went with them. As he looked away the three were
on the edge of the road and Fernando was shaking his head as they tried to get him up
the bank.
 “Give me a rifle here,” Robert Jordan heard him say in a choky voice.
 “No, hombre. We will get thee to the horses.”
 “What would I do with a horse?” Fernando said. “I am very well here.”
 Robert Jordan did not hear the rest for he was speaking to Anselmo.
 “Blow it if tanks come,” he said. “But only if they come onto it. Blow it if armored cars
come. If they come onto it. Anything else Pablo will stop.”
 “I will not blow it with thee beneath it.”
 “Take no account of me. Blow it if thou needest to. I fix the other wire and come back.
Then we will blow it together.”
 He started running for the center of the bridge.
 Anselmo saw Robert Jordan run up the bridge, coil of wire over his arm, pliers hanging
from one wrist and the submachine gun slung over his back. He saw him climb down
under the rail of the bridge and out of sight. Anselmo held the wire in his hand, his right
hand, and he crouched behind the stone marker and looked down the road and across
the bridge. Halfway between him and the bridge was the sentry, who had settled now
closer to the road, sinking closer onto the smooth road surface as the sun weighed on
his back. His rifle, lying on the road, the bayonet fixed, pointed straight toward Anselmo.
The old man looked past him along the surface of the bridge crossed by the shadows of
the bridge rail to where the road swung to the left along the gorge and then turned out of
sight behind the rocky wall. He looked at the far sentry box with the sun shining on it and
then, conscious of the wire in his hand, he turned his head to where Fernando was
speaking to Primitivo and the gypsy.
 “Leave me here,” Fernando said. “It hurts much and there is much hemorrhage inside.
“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway 235
I feel it in the inside when I move.”
 “Let us get thee up the slope,” Primitivo said. “Put thy arms around our shoulders and
we will take thy legs.”
 “It is inutile,” Fernando said. “Put me here behind a stone. I am as useful here as
above.”
 “But when we go,” Primitivo said.
 “Leave me here,” Fernando said. “There is no question of my travelling with this. Thus
it gives one horse more. I am very well here. Certainly they will come soon.”
 “We can take thee up the hill,” the gypsy said. “Easily.”
 He was, naturally, in a deadly hurry to be gone, as was Primitivo. But they had brought
him this far.
 “Nay,” Fernando said. “I am very well here. What passes with Eladio?”
 The gypsy put his finger on his head to show where the wound had been.
 “Here,” he said. “After thee. When we made the rush.”
 “Leave me,” Fernando said. Anselmo could see he was suffering much. He held both
hands against his groin now and put his head back against the bank, his legs straight
out before him. His face was gray and sweating.
 “Leave me now please, for a favor,” he said. His eyes were shut with pain, the edges
of the lips twitching. “I find myself very well here.”
 “Here is a rifle and cartridges,” Primitivo said.
 “Is it mine?” Fernando asked, his eyes shut.
 “Nay, the Pilar has thine,” Primitivo said. “This is mine.”
 “I would prefer my own,” Fernando said. “I am more accustomed to it.”
 “I will bring it to thee,” the gypsy lied to him. “Keep this until it comes.”
 “I am in a very good position here,” Fernando said. “Both for up the road and for the
bridge.” He opened his eyes, turned his head and looked across the bridge, then shut
them as the pain came.
 The gypsy tapped his head and motioned with his thumb to Primitivo for them to be
off.
 “Then we will be down for thee,” Primitivo said and started up the slope after the
gypsy, who was climbing fast.
 Fernando lay back against the bank. In front of him was one of the whitewashed
stones that marked the edge of the road. His head was in the shadow but the sun shone
on his plugged and bandaged wound and on his hands that were cupped over it. His
legs and his feet also were in the sun. The rifle lay beside him and there were three clips
of cartridges shining in the sun beside the rifle. A fly crawled on his hands but the small
tickling did not come through the pain.
 “Fernando!” Anselmo called to him from where he crouched, holding the wire. He had
made a loop in the end of the wire and twisted it close so he could hold it in his fist.
 “Fernando!” he called again.
 Fernando opened his eyes and looked at him.
 “How does it go?” Fernando asked.
 “Very good,” Anselmo said. “Now in a minute we will be blowing it.”
 “I am pleased. Anything you need me for advise me,” Fernando said and shut his eyes
again and the pain lurched in him.
 Anselmo looked away from him and out onto the bridge.
 He was watching for the first sight of the coil of wire being handed up onto the bridge
and for the Inglés’s sunburnt head and face to follow it as he would pull himself up the
side. At the same time he was watching beyond the bridge for anything to come around
the far corner of the road. He did not feel afraid now at all and he had not been afraid all
the day. It goes so fast and it is so normal, he thought. I hated the shooting of the guard
and it made me an emotion but that is passed now. How could the Inglés say that the
shooting of a man is like the shooting of an animal? In all hunting I have had an elation
and no feeling of wrong. But to shoot a man gives a feeling as though one had struck
one’s own brother when you are grown men. And to shoot him various times to kill him.
“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway 236
Nay, do not think of that. That gave thee too much emotion and thee ran blubbering
down the bridge like a woman.
 That is over, he told himself, and thou canst try to atone for it as for the others. But
now thou has what thou asked for last night coming home across the hills. Thou art in
battle and thou hast no problem. If I die on this morning now it is all right.
 Then he looked at Fernando lying there against the bank with his hands cupped over
the groove of his hip, his lips blue, his eyes tight shut, breathing heavily and slowly, and
he thought, If I die may it be quickly. Nay I said I would ask nothing more if I were
granted what I needed for today. So I will not ask. Understand? I ask nothing. Nothing in
any way. Give me what I asked for and I leave all the rest according to discretion.
 He listened to the noise that came, far away, of the battle at the pass and he said to
himself, Truly this is a great day. I should realize and know what a day this is.
 But there was no lift or any excitement in his heart. That was all gone and there was
nothing but a calmness. And now, as he crouched behind the marker stone with the
looped wire in his hand and another loop of it around his wrist and the gravel beside the
road under his knees he was not lonely nor did he feel in any way alone. He was one
with the wire in his hand and one with the bridge, and one with the charges the Inglés
had placed. He was one with the Inglés still working under the bridge and he was one
with all of the battle and with the Republic.
 But there was no excitement. It was all calm now and the sun beat down on his neck
and on his shoulders as he crouched and as he looked up he saw the high, cloudless
sky and the slope of the mountain rising beyond the river and he was not happy but he
was neither lonely nor afraid.
 Up the hill slope Pilar lay behind a tree watching the road that came down from the
pass. She had three loaded rifles by her and she handed one to Primitivo as he dropped
down beside her.
 “Get down there,” she said. “Behind that tree. Thou, gypsy, over there,” she pointed to
another tree below. “Is he dead?”
 “Nay. Not yet,” Primitivo said.
 “It was bad luck,” Pilar said. “If we had had two more it need not have happened. He
should have crawled around the sawdust pile. Is he all right there where he is?”
 Primitivo shook his head.
 “When the Inglés blows the bridge will fragments come this far?” the gypsy asked from
behind his tree.
 “I don’t know,” Pilar said. “But Agustín with the máquina is closer than thee. The Inglés
would not have placed him there if it were too close.”
 “But I remember with the blowing of the train the lamp of the engine blew by over my
head and pieces of steel flew by like swallows.”
 “Thou hast poetic memories,” Pilar said. “Like swallows. Joder! They were like wash
boilers. Listen, gypsy, thou hast comported thyself well today. Now do not let thy fear
catch up with thee.”
 “Well, I only asked if it would blow this far so I might keep well behind the tree trunk,”
the gypsy said.
 “Keep it thus,” Pilar told him. “How many have we killed?”
 “Pues five for us. Two here. Canst thou not see the other at the far end? Look there
toward the bridge. See the box? Look! Dost see?” He pointed. “Then there were eight
below for Pablo. I watched that post for the Inglés.”
 Pilar grunted. Then she said violently and raging, “What passes with that Inglés? What
is he obscenitying off under that bridge. Vaya mandanga! Is he building a bridge or
blowing one?”
 She raised her head and looked down at Anselmo crouched behind the stone marker.
 “Hey, viejo!” she shouted. “What passes with thy obscenity of an Inglés?”
 “Patience, woman,” Anselmo called up, holding the wire lightly but firmly. “He is
terminating his work.”
 “But what in the name of the great whore does he take so much time about?”
“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway 237
 “Es muy concienzudo!” Anselmo shouted. “It is a scientific labor.”
 “I obscenity in the milk of science,” Pilar raged to the gypsy. “Let the filth-faced
obscenity blow it and be done. Maria!” she shouted in her deep voice up the hill. “Thy
Inglés—” and she shouted a flood of obscenity about Jordan’s imaginary actions under
the bridge.
 “Calm yourself, woman,” Anselmo called from the road. “He is doing an enormous
work. He is finishing it now.”
 “The hell with it,” Pilar raged. “It is speed that counts.”
 Just then they all heard firing start down the road where Pablo was holding the post he
had taken. Pilar stopped cursing and listened. “Ay,” she said. “Ayee. Ayee. That’s it.”
 Robert Jordan heard it as he swung the coil of wire up onto the bridge with one hand
and then pulled himself up after it. As his knees rested on the edge of the iron of the
bridge and his hands were on the surface he heard the machine gun firing around the
bend below. It was a different sound from Pablo’s automatic rifle. He got to his feet,
leaned over, passed his coil of wire clear and commenced to pay out wire as he walked
backwards and sideways along the bridge.
 He heard the firing and as he walked he felt it in the pit of his stomach as though it
echoed on his own diaphragm. It was closer now as he walked and he looked back at
the bend of the road. But it was still clear of any car, or tank or men. It was still clear
when he was halfway to the end of the bridge. It was still clear when he was three
quarters of the way, his wire running clear and unfouled, and it was still clear as he
climbed around behind the sentry box, holding his wire out to keep it from catching on
the iron work. Then he was on the road and it was still clear below on the road and then
he was moving fast backwards up the little washed-out gully by the lower side of the
road as an outfielder goes backwards for a long fly ball, keeping the wire taut, and now
he was almost opposite Anselmo’s stone and it was still clear below the bridge.
 Then he heard the truck coming down the road and he saw it over his shoulder just
coming onto the long slope and he swung his wrist once around the wire and yelled to
Anselmo, “Blow her!” and he dug his heels in and leaned back hard onto the tension of
the wire with a turn of it around his wrist and the noise of the truck was coming behind
and ahead there was the road with the dead sentry and the long bridge and the stretch
of road below, still clear and then there was a cracking roar and the middle of the bridge
rose up in the air like a wave breaking and he felt the blast from the explosion roll back
against him as he dove on his face in the pebbly gully with his hands holding tight over
his head. His face was down against the pebbles as the bridge settled where it had risen
and the familiar yellow smell of it rolled over him in acrid smoke and then it commenced
to rain pieces of steel.
 After the steel stopped falling he was still alive and he raised his head and looked
across the bridge. The center section of it was gone. There were jagged pieces of steel
on the bridge with their bright, new torn edges and ends and these were all over the
road. The truck had stopped up the road about a hundred yards. The driver and the two
men who had been with him were running toward a culvert.
 Fernando was still lying against the bank and he was still breathing. His arms straight
by his sides, his hands relaxed.
 Anselmo lay face down behind the white marking stone. His left arm was doubled
under his head and his right arm was stretched straight out. The loop of wire was still
around his right fist. Robert Jordan got to his feet, crossed the road, knelt by him and
made sure that he was dead. He did not turn him over to see what the piece of steel had
done. He was dead and that was all.
 He looked very small, dead, Robert Jordan thought. He looked small and gray-headed
and Robert Jordan thought, I wonder how he ever carried such big loads if that is the
size he really was. Then he saw the shape of the calves and the thighs in the tight, gray
herdsman’s breeches and the worn soles of the rope-soled shoes and he picked up
Anselmo’s carbine and the two sacks, practically empty now and went over and picked
up the rifle that lay beside Fernando. He kicked a jagged piece of steel off the surface of
“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway 238
the road. Then he swung the two rifles over his shoulder, holding them by the muzzles,
and started up the slope into the timber. He did not look back nor did he even look
across the bridge at the road. They were still firing around the bend below but he cared
nothing about that now.
 He was coughing from the TNT fumes and he felt numb all through himself.
 He put one of the rifles down by Pilar where she lay behind the tree. She looked and
saw that made three rifles that she had again.
 “You are too high up here,” he said. “There’s a truck up the road where you can’t see
it. They thought it was planes. You better get farther down. I’m going down with Agustín
to cover Pablo.”
 “The old one?” she asked him, looking at his face.
 “Dead.”
 He coughed again, wrackingly, and spat on the ground.
 “Thy bridge is blown, Inglés,” Pilar looked at him. “Don’t forget that.”
 “I don’t forget anything,” he said. “You have a big voice,” he said to Pilar. “I have heard
thee bellow. Shout up to the Maria and tell her that I am all right.”
 “We lost two at the sawmill,” Pilar said, trying to make him understand.
 “So I saw,” Robert Jordan said. “Did you do something stupid?”
 “Go and obscenity thyself, Inglés,” Pilar said. “Fernando and Eladio were men, too.”
 “Why don’t you go up with the horses?” Robert Jordan said. “I can cover here better
than thee.”
 “Thou art to cover Pablo.”
 “The hell with Pablo. Let him cover himself with mierda.”
 “Nay, Inglés. He came back. He has fought much below there. Thou hast not listened?
He is fighting now. Against something bad. Do you not hear?”
 “I’ll cover him. But obscenity all of you. Thou and Pablo both.”
 “Inglés,” Pilar said. “Calm thyself. I have been with thee in this as no one could be.
Pablo did thee a wrong but he returned.”
 “If I had had the exploder the old man would not have been killed. I could have blown
it from here.”
 “If, if, if—” Pilar said.
 The anger and the emptiness and the hate that had come with the let-down after the
bridge, when he had looked up from where he had lain and crouching, seen Anselmo
dead, were still all through him. In him, too, was despair from the sorrow that soldiers
turn to hatred in order that they may continue to be soldiers. Now it was over he was
lonely, detached and unelated and he hated every one he saw.
 “If there had been no snow—” Pilar said. And then, not suddenly, as a physical
release could have been (if the woman would have put her arm around him, say) but
slowly and from his head he began to accept it and let the hate go out. Sure, the snow.
That had done it. The snow. Done itto others. Once you saw it again as it was to others,
once you got rid of your own self, the always ridding of self that you had to do in war.
Where there could be no self. Where yourself is only to be lost. Then, from his losing of
it, he heard Pilar say, “Sordo—”
 “What?” he said.
 “Sordo—”
 “Yes,” Robert Jordan said. He grinned at her, a cracked, stiff, too-tightened-facialtendoned grin. “Forget it. I was wrong. I am sorry, woman. Let us do this well and all
together. And the bridge is blown, as thou sayest.”
 “Yes. Thou must think of things in their place.”
 “Then I go now to Agustín. Put thy gypsy much farther down so that he can see well
up the road. Give those guns to Primitivo and take this máquina. Let me show thee.”
 “Keep the máquina,” Pilar said. “We will not be here any time. Pablo should come now
and we will be going.”
 “Rafael,” Robert Jordan said, “come down here with me. Here. Good. See those
coming out of the culvert. There, above the truck? Coming toward the truck? Hit me one
“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway 239
of those. Sit. Take it easy.”
 The gypsy aimed carefully and fired and as he jerked the bolt back and ejected the
shell Robert Jordan said, “Over. You threw against the rock above. See the rock dust?
Lower, by two feet. Now, careful. They’re running. Good. Sigue tirando.”
 “I got one,” the gypsy said. The man was down in the road halfway between the
culvert and the truck. The other two did not stop to drag him. They ran for the culvert
and ducked in.
 “Don’t shoot at him,” Robert Jordan said. “Shoot for the top part of a front tire on the
truck. So if you miss you’ll hit the engine. Good.” He watched with the glasses. “A little
lower. Good. You shoot like hell. Mucho! Mucho! Shoot me the top of the radiator.
Anywhere on the radiator. Thou art a champion. Look. Don’t let anything come past that
point there. See?”
 “Watch me break the windshield in the truck,” the gypsy said happily.
 “Nay. The truck is already sick,” Robert Jordan said. “Hold thy fire until anything
comes down the road. Start firing when it is opposite the culvert. Try to hit the driver.
That you all should fire, then,” he spoke to Pilar who had come farther down the slope
with Primitivo. “You are wonderfully placed here. See how that steepness guards thy
flank?”
 “That you should get about thy business with Agustín,” Pilar said. “Desist from thy
lecture. I have seen terrain in my time.”
 “Put Primitivo farther up there,” Robert Jordan said. “There. See, man? This side of
where the bank steepens.”
 “Leave me,” said Pilar. “Get along, Inglés. Thou and thy perfection. Here there is no
problem.”
 Just then they heard the planes.
 Maria had been with the horses for a long time, but they were no comfort to her. Nor
was she any to them. From where she was in the forest she could not see the road nor
could she see the bridge and when the firing started she put her arm around the neck of
the big white-faced bay stallion that she had gentled and brought gifts to many times
when the horses had been in the corral in the trees below the camp. But her
nervousness made the big stallion nervous, too, and he jerked his head, his nostrils
widening at the firing and the noise of the bombs. Maria could not keep still and she
walked around patting and gentling the horses and making them all more nervous and
agitated.
 She tried to think of the firing not as just a terrible thing that was happening, but to
realize that it was Pablo below with the new men, and Pilar with the others above, and
that she must not worry nor get into a panic but must have confidence in Roberto. But
she could not do this and all the firing above and below the bridge and the distant sound
of the battle that rolled down from the pass like the noise of a far-off storm with a dried,
rolling rattle in it and the irregular beat of the bombs was simply a horrible thing that
almost kept her from breathing.
 Then later she heard Pilar’s big voice from away below on the hillside shouting up
some obscenity to her that she could not understand and she thought, Oh, God no, no.
Don’t talk like that with him in peril. Don’t offend any one and make useless risks. Don’t
give any provocation.
 Then she commenced to pray for Roberto quickly and automatically as she had done
at school, saying the prayers as fast as she could and counting them on the fingers of
her left hand, praying by tens of each of the two prayers she was repeating. Then the
bridge blew and one horse snapped his halter when he rose and jerked his head at the
cracking roar and he went off through the trees. Maria caught him finally and brought
him back, shivering, trembling, his chest dark with sweat, the saddle down, and coming
back through the trees she heard shooting below and she thought I cannot stand this
longer. I cannot live not knowing any longer. I cannot breathe and my mouth is so dry.
And I am afraid and I am no good and I frighten the horses and only caught this horse
by hazard because he knocked the saddle down against a tree and caught himself
“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway 240
kicking into the stirrups and now as I get the saddle up, Oh, God, I do not know. I cannot
bear it. Oh please have him be all right for all my heart and all of me is at the bridge.
The Republic is one thing and we must win is another thing. But, Oh, Sweet Blessed
Virgin, bring him back to me from the bridge and I will do anything thou sayest ever.
Because I am not here. There isn’t any me. I am only with him. Take care of him for me
and that will be me and then I will do the things for thee and he will not mind. Nor will it
be against the Republic. Oh, please forgive me for I am very confused. I am too
confused now. But if thou takest care of him I will do whatever is right. I will do what he
says and what you say. With the two of me I will do it. But this now not knowing I cannot
endure.
 Then, the horse tied again, she with the saddle up now, the blanket smoothed, hauling
tight on the cinch she heard the big, deep voice from the timber below, “Maria! Maria!
Thy Inglés is all right. Hear me? All right. Sin Novedad!”
 Maria held the saddle with both hands and pressed her cropped head hard against it
and cried. She heard the deep voice shouting again and she turned from the saddle and
shouted, choking, “Yes! Thank you!” Then, choking again, “Thank you! Thank you very
much!”
 When they heard the planes they all looked up and the planes were coming from
Segovia very high in the sky, silvery in the high sky, their drumming rising over all the
other sounds.
 “Those!” Pilar said. “There has only lacked those!”
 Robert Jordan put his arm on her shoulders as he watched them. “Nay, woman,” he
said. “Those do not come for us. Those have no time for us. Calm thyself.”
 “I hate them.”
 “Me too. But now I must go to Agustín.”
 He circled the hillside through the pines and all the time there was the throbbing,
drumming of the planes and across the shattered bridge on the road below, around the
bend of the road there was the intermittent hammering fire of a heavy machine gun.
 Robert Jordan dropped down to where Agustín lay in the clump of scrub pines behind
the automatic rifle and more planes were coming all the time.
 “What passes below?” Agustín said. “What is Pablo doing? Doesn’t he know the
bridge is gone?”
 “Maybe he can’t leave.”
 “Then let us leave. The hell with him.”
 “He will come now if he is able,” Robert Jordan said. “We should see him now.”
 “I have not heard him,” Agustín said. “Not for five minutes. No. There! Listen! There he
is. That’s him.”
 There was a burst of the spot-spot-spotting fire of the cavalry submachine gun, then
another, then another.
 “That’s the bastard,” Robert Jordan said.
 He watched still more planes coming over in the high cloudless blue sky and he
watched Agustín’s face as he looked up at them. Then he looked down at the shattered
bridge and across to the stretch of road which still was clear. He coughed and spat and
listened to the heavy machine gun hammer again below the bend. It sounded to be in
the same place that it was before.
 “And what’s that?” Agustín asked. “What the unnameable is that?”
 “It has been going since before I blew the bridge,” Robert Jordan said. He looked
down at the bridge now and he could see the stream through the torn gap where the
center had fallen, hanging like a bent steel apron. He heard the first of the planes that
had gone over now bombing up above at the pass and more were still coming. The
noise of their motors filled all the high sky and looking up he saw their pursuit, minute
and tiny, circling and wheeling high above them.
 “I don’t think they ever crossed the lines the other morning,” Primitivo said. “They must
have swung off to the west and then come back. They could not be making an attack if
they had seen these.”
“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway 241
 “Most of these are new,” Robert Jordan said.
 He had the feeling of something that had started normally and had then brought great,
outsized, giant repercussions. It was as though you had thrown a stone and the stone
made a ripple and the ripple returned roaring and toppling as a tidal wave. Or as though
you shouted and the echo came back in rolls and peals of thunder, and the thunder was
deadly. Or as though you struck one man and he fell and as far as you could see other
men rose up all armed and armored. He was glad he was not with Golz up at the pass.
 Lying there, by Agustín, watching the planes going over, listening for firing behind him,
watching the road below where he knew he would see something but not what it would
be, he still felt numb with the surprise that he had not been killed at the bridge. He had
accepted being killed so completely that all of this now seemed unreal. Shake out of
that, he said to himself. Get rid of that. There is much, much, much to be done today.
But it would not leave him and he felt, consciously, all of this becoming like a dream.
 “You swallowed too much of that smoke,” he told himself. But he knew it was not that.
He could feel, solidly, how unreal it all was through the absolute reality and he looked
down at the bridge and then back to the sentry lying on the road, to where Anselmo lay,
to Fernando against the bank and back up the smooth, brown road to the stalled truck
and still it was unreal.
 “You better sell out your part of you quickly,” he told himself. “You’re like one of those
cocks in the pit where nobody has seen the wound given and it doesn’t show and he is
already going cold with it.”
 “Nuts,” he said to himself. “You are a little groggy is all, and you have a let-down after
responsibility, is all. Take it easy.”
 Then Agustín grabbed his arm and pointed and he looked across the gorge and saw
Pablo.
 They saw Pablo come running around the corner of the bend in the road. At the sheer
rock where the road went out of sight they saw him stop and lean against the rock and
fire back up the road. Robert Jordan saw Pablo, short, heavy and stocky, his cap gone,
leaning against the rock wall and firing the short cavalry automatic rifle and he could see
the bright flicker of the cascading brass hulls as the sun caught them. They saw Pablo
crouch and fire another burst. Then, without looking back, he came running, short,
bowlegged, fast, his head bent down straight toward the bridge.
 Robert Jordan had pushed Agustín over and he had the stock of the big automatic rifle
against his shoulder and was sighting on the bend of the road. His own submachine gun
lay by his left hand. It was not accurate enough for that range.
 As Pablo came toward them Robert Jordan sighted on the bend but nothing came.
Pablo had reached the bridge, looked over his shoulder once, glanced at the bridge, and
then turned to his left and gone down into the gorge and out of sight. Robert Jordan was
still watching the bend and nothing had come in sight. Agustín got up on one knee. He
could see Pablo climbing down into the gorge like a goat. There had been no noise of
firing below since they had first seen Pablo.
 “You see anything up above? On the rocks above?” Robert Jordan asked.
 “Nothing.”
 Robert Jordan watched the bend of the road. He knew the wall just below that was too
steep for any one to climb but below it eased and some one might have circled up
above.
 If things had been unreal before, they were suddenly real enough now. It was as
though a reflex lens camera had been suddenly brought into focus. It was then he saw
the low-bodied, angled snout and squat green, gray and brown-splashed turret with the
projecting machine gun come around the bend into the bright sun. He fired on it and he
could hear the spang against the steel. The little whippet tank scuttled back behind the
rock wall. Watching the corner, Robert Jordan saw the nose just reappear, then the
edge of the turret showed and the turret swung so that the gun was pointing down the
road.
 “It seems like a mouse coming out of his hole,” Agustín said. “Look, Inglés.”
“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway 242
 “He has little confidence,” Robert Jordan said.
 “This is the big insect Pablo has been fighting,” Agustín said. “Hit him again, Inglés.”
 “Nay. I cannot hurt him. I don’t want him to see where we are.”
 The tank commenced to fire down the road. The bullets hit the road surface and sung
off and now they were pinging and clanging in the iron of the bridge. It was the same
machine gun they had heard below.
 “Cabrón!” Agustín said. “Is that the famous tanks, Inglés?”
 “That’s a baby one.”
 “Cabrón. If I had a baby bottle full of gasoline I would climb up there and set fire to
him. What will he do, Inglés?”
 “After a while he will have another look.”
 “And these are what men fear,” Agustín said. “Look, Inglés! He’s rekilling the sentries.”
 “Since he has no other target,” Robert Jordan said. “Do not reproach him.”
 But he was thinking, Sure, make fun of him. But suppose it was you, way back here in
your own country and they held you up with firing on the main road. Then a bridge was
blown. Wouldn’t you think it was mined ahead or that there was a trap? Sure you would.
He’s done all right. He’s waiting for something else to come up. He’s engaging the
enemy. It’s only us. But he can’t tell that. Look at the little bastard.
 The little tank had nosed a little farther around the corner.
 Just then Agustín saw Pablo coming over the edge of the gorge, pulling himself over
on hands and knees, his bristly face running with sweat.
 “Here comes the son of a bitch,” he said.
 “Who?”
 “Pablo.”
 Robert Jordan looked, saw Pablo, and then he commenced firing at the part of the
camouflaged turret of the tank where he knew the slit above the machine gun would be.
The little tank whirred backwards, scuttling out of sight and Robert Jordan picked up the
automatic rifle, clamped the tripod against the barrel and swung the gun with its still hot
muzzle over his shoulder. The muzzle was so hot it burned his shoulder and he shoved
it far behind him turning the stock flat in his hand.
 “Bring the sack of pans and my little máquina,” he shouted, “and come running.”
 Robert Jordan ran up the hill through the pines. Agustín was close behind him and
behind him Pablo was coming.
 “Pilar!” Jordan shouted across the hill. “Come on, woman!”
 The three of them were going as fast as they could up the steep slope. They could not
run any more because the grade was too severe and Pablo, who had no load but the
light cavalry submachine gun, had closed up with the other two.
 “And thy people?” Agustín said to Pablo out of his dry mouth.
 “All dead,” Pablo said. He was almost unable to breathe. Agustín turned his head and
looked at him.
 “We have plenty of horses now, Inglés,” Pablo panted.
 “Good,” Robert Jordan said. The murderous bastard, he thought. “What did you
encounter?”
 “Everything,” Pablo said. He was breathing in lunges. “What passed with Pilar?”
 “She lost Fernando and the brother—”
 “Eladio,” Agustín said.
 “And thou?” Pablo asked.
 “I lost Anselmo.”
 “There are lots of horses,” Pablo said. “Even for the baggage.”
 Agustín bit his lip, looked at Robert Jordan and shook his head. Below them, out of
sight through the trees, they heard the tank firing on the road and bridge again.
 Robert Jordan jerked his head. “What passed with that?” he said to Pablo. He did not
like to look at Pablo, nor to smell him, but he wanted to hear him.
 “I could not leave with that there,” Pablo said. “We were barricaded at the lower bend
of the post. Finally it went back to look for something and I came.”
“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway 243
 “What were you shooting at, at the bend?” Agustín asked bluntly.
 Pablo looked at him, started to grin, thought better of it, and said nothing.
 “Did you shoot them all?” Agustín asked. Robert Jordan was thinking, keep your
mouth shut. It is none of your business now. They have done all that you could expect
and more. This is an intertribal matter. Don’t make moral judgments. What do you
expect from a murderer? You’re working with a murderer. Keep your mouth shut. You
knew enough about him before. This is nothing new. But you dirty bastard, he thought.
You dirty, rotten bastard.
 His chest was aching with climbing as though it would split after the running and
ahead now through the trees he saw the horses.
 “Go ahead,” Agustín was saying. “Why do you not say you shot them?”
 “Shut up,” Pablo said. “I have fought much today and well. Ask the Inglés.”
 “And now get us through today,” Robert Jordan said. “For it is thee who has the plan
for this.”
 “I have a good plan,” Pablo said. “With a little luck we will be all right.”
 He was beginning to breathe better.
 “You’re not going to kill any of us, are you?” Agustín said. “For I will kill thee now.”
 “Shut up,” Pablo said. “I have to look after thy interest and that of the band. This is
war. One cannot do what one would wish.”
 “Cabrón,” said Agustín. “You take all the prizes.”
 “Tell me what thou encountered below,” Robert Jordan said to Pablo.
 “Everything,” Pablo repeated. He was still breathing as though it were tearing his chest
but he could talk steadily now and his face and head were running with sweat and his
shoulders and chest were soaked with it. He looked at Robert Jordan cautiously to see if
he were really friendly and then he grinned. “Everything,” he said again. “First we took
the post. Then came a motorcyclist. Then another. Then an ambulance. Then a camion.
Then the tank. Just before thou didst the bridge.”
 “Then—”
 “The tank could not hurt us but we could not leave for it commanded the road. Then it
went away and I came.”
 “And thy people?” Agustín put in, still looking for trouble.
 “Shut up,” Pablo looked at him squarely, and his face was the face of a man who had
fought well before any other thing had happened. “They were not of our band.”
 Now they could see the horses tied to the trees, the sun coming down on them
through the pine branches and them tossing their heads and kicking against the botflies
and Robert Jordan saw Maria and the next thing he was holding her tight, tight, with the
automatic rifle leaning against his side, the flash-cone pressing against his ribs and
Maria saying, “Thou, Roberto. Oh, thou.”
 “Yes, rabbit. My good, good rabbit. Now we go.”
 “Art thou here truly?”
 “Yes. Yes. Truly. Oh, thou!”
 He had never thought that you could know that there was a woman if there was battle;
nor that any part of you could know it, or respond to it; nor that if there was a woman
that she should have breasts small, round and tight against you through a shirt; nor that
they, the breasts, could know about the two of them in battle. But it was true and he
thought, good. That’s good. I would not have believed that and he held her to him once
hard, hard, but he did not look at her, and then he slapped her where he never had
slapped her and said, “Mount. Mount. Get on that saddle, guapa.”
 Then they were untying the halters and Robert Jordan had given the automatic rifle
back to Agustín and slung his own submachine gun over his back, and he was putting
bombs out of his pockets into the saddlebags, and he stuffed one empty pack inside the
other and tied that one behind his saddle. Then Pilar came up, so breathless from the
climb she could not talk, but only motioned.
 Then Pablo stuffed three hobbles he had in his hand into a saddlebag, stood up and
said, “Qué tal, woman?” and she only nodded, and then they were all mounting.
“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway 244
 Robert Jordan was on the big gray he had first seen in the snow of the morning of the
day before and he felt that it was much horse between his legs and under his hands. He
was wearing rope-soled shoes and the stirrups were a little too short; his submachine
gun was slung over his shoulder, his pockets were full of clips and he was sitting
reloading the one used clip, the reins under one arm, tight, watching Pilar mount into a
strange sort of seat on top of the duffle lashed onto the saddle of the buckskin.
 “Cut that stuff loose for God’s sake,” Primitivo said. “Thou wilt fall and the horse
cannot carry it.”
 “Shut up,” said Pilar. “We go to make a life with this.”
 “Canst ride like that, woman?” Pablo asked her from the guardia civil saddle on the
great bay horse.
 “Like any milk peddler,” Pilar told him. “How do you go, old one?”
 “Straight down. Across the road. Up the far slope and into the timber where it
narrows.”
 “Across the road?” Agustín wheeled beside him, kicking his soft-heeled, canvas shoes
against the stiff, unresponding belly of one of the horses Pablo had recruited in the
night.
 “Yes, man. It is the only way,” Pablo said. He handed him one of the lead ropes.
Primitivo and the gypsy had the others.
 “Thou canst come at the end if thou will, Inglés,” Pablo said. “We cross high enough to
be out of range of that máquina. But we will go separately and riding much and then be
together where it narrows above.”
 “Good,” said Robert Jordan.
 They rode down through the timber toward the edge of the road. Robert Jordan rode
just behind Maria. He could not ride beside her for the timber. He caressed the gray
once with his thigh muscles, and then held him steady as they dropped down fast and
sliding through the pines, telling the gray with his thighs as they dropped down what the
spurs would have told him if they had been on level ground.
 “Thou,” he said to Maria, “go second as they cross the road. First is not so bad though
it seems bad. Second is good. It is later that they are always watching for.”
 “But thou—”
 “I will go suddenly. There will be no problem. It is the places in line that are bad.”
 He was watching the round, bristly head of Pablo, sunk in his shoulders as he rode,
his automatic rifle slung over his shoulder. He was watching Pilar, her head bare, her
shoulders broad, her knees higher than her thighs as her heels hooked into the bundles.
She looked back at him once and shook her head.
 “Pass the Pilar before you cross the road,” Robert Jordan said to Maria.
 Then he was looking through the thinning trees and he saw the oiled dark of the road
below and beyond it the green slope of the hillside. We are above the culvert, he saw,
and just below the height where the road drops down straight toward the bridge in that
long sweep. We are around eight hundred yards above the bridge. That is not out of
range for the Fiat in that little tank if they have come up to the bridge.
 “Maria,” he said. “Pass the Pilar before we reach the road and ride wide up that slope.”
 She looked back at him but did not say anything. He did not look at her except to see
that she had understood.
 “Comprendes?” he asked her.
 She nodded.
 “Move up,” he said.
 She shook her head.
 “Move up!”
 “Nay,” she told him, turning around and shaking her head. “I go in the order that I am
to go.”
 Just then Pablo dug both his spurs into the big bay and he plunged down the last pineneedled slope and cross the road in a pounding, sparking of shod hooves. The others
came behind him and Robert Jordan saw them crossing the road and slamming on up
“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway 245
the green slope and heard the machine gun hammer at the bridge. Then he heard a
noise come sweeeish-crack-boom! The boom was a sharp crack that widened in the
cracking and on the hillside he saw a small fountain of earth rise with a plume of gray
smoke. Sweeish-crack-boom! It came again, the swishing like the noise of a rocket and
there was another up-pulsing of dirt and smoke farther up the hillside.
 Ahead of him the gypsy was stopped beside the road in the shelter of the last trees.
He looked ahead at the slope and then he looked back toward Robert Jordan.
 “Go ahead, Rafael,” Robert Jordan said. “Gallop, man!”
 The gypsy was holding the lead rope with the pack-horse pulling his head taut behind
him.
 “Drop the pack-horse and gallop!” Robert Jordan said.
 He saw the gypsy’s hand extended behind him, rising higher and higher, seeming to
take forever as his heels kicked into the horse he was riding and the rope came taut,
then dropped, and he was across the road and Robert Jordan was kneeing against a
frightened packhorse that bumped back into him as the gypsy crossed the hard, dark
road and he heard his horse’s hooves clumping as he galloped up the slope.
 Wheeeeeeish-ca-rack! The flat trajectory of the shell came and he saw the gypsy jink
like a running boar as the earth spouted the little black and gray geyser ahead of him.
He watched him galloping, slow and reaching now, up the long green slope and the gun
threw behind him and ahead of him and he was under the fold of the hill with the others.
 I can’t take the damned pack-horse, Robert Jordan thought. Though I wish I could
keep the son of a bitch on my off side. I’d like to have him between me and that 47 mm.
they’re throwing with. By God, I’ll try to get him up there anyway.
 He rode up to the pack-horse, caught hold of the hackamore, and then, holding the
rope, the horse trotting behind him, rode fifty yards up through the trees. At the edge of
the trees he looked down the road past the truck to the bridge. He could see men out on
the bridge and behind it looked like a traffic jam on the road. Robert Jordan looked
around, saw what he wanted finally and reached up and broke a dead limb from a pine
tree. He dropped the hackamore, edged the pack-horse up to the slope that slanted
down to the road and then hit him hard across the rump with the tree branch. “Go on,
you son of a bitch,” he said, and threw the dead branch after him as the pack-horse
crossed the road and started across the slope. The branch hit him and the horse broke
from a run into a gallop.
 Robert Jordan rode thirty yards farther up the road; beyond that the bank was too
steep. The gun was firing now with the rocket whish and the cracking, dirt-spouting
boom. “Come on, you big gray fascist bastard,” Robert Jordan said to the horse and put
him down the slope in a sliding plunge. Then he was out in the open, over the road that
was so hard under the hooves he felt the pound of it come up all the way to his
shoulders, his neck and his teeth, onto the smooth of the slope, the hooves finding it,
cutting it, pounding it, reaching, throwing, going, and he looked down across the slope to
where the bridge showed now at a new angle he had never seen. It crossed in profile
now without foreshortening and in the center was the broken place and behind it on the
road was the little tank and behind the little tank was a big tank with a gun that flashed
now yellow-bright as a mirror and the screech as the air ripped apart seemed almost
over the gray neck that stretched ahead of him, and he turned his head as the dirt
fountained up the hillside. The pack-horse was ahead of him swinging too far to the right
and slowing down and Robert Jordan, galloping, his head turned a little toward the
bridge, saw the line of trucks halted behind the turn that showed now clearly as he was
gaining height, and he saw the bright yellow flash that signalled the instant whish and
boom, and the shell fell short, but he heard the metal sailing from where the dirt rose.
 He saw them all ahead in the edge of the timber watching him and he said, “Arre
caballo! Go on, horse!” and felt his big horse’s chest surging with the steepening of the
slope and saw the gray neck stretching and the gray ears ahead and he reached and
patted the wet gray neck, and he looked back at the bridge and saw the bright flash from
the heavy, squat, mud-colored tank there on the road and then he did not hear any
“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway 246
whish but only a banging acrid smelling clang like a boiler being ripped apart and he
was under the gray horse and the gray horse was kicking and he was trying to pull out
from under the weight.
 He could move all right. He could move toward the right. But his left leg stayed
perfectly flat under the horse as he moved to the right. It was as though there was a new
joint in it; not the hip joint but another one that went sideways like a hinge. Then he
knew what it was all right and just then the gray horse knee-ed himself up and Robert
Jordan’s right leg, that had kicked the stirrup loose just as it should, slipped clear over
the saddle and came down beside him and he felt with his two hands of his thigh bone
where the left leg lay flat against the ground and his hands both felt the sharp bone and
where it pressed against the skin.
 The gray horse was standing almost over him and he could see his ribs heaving. The
grass was green where he sat and there were meadow flowers in it and he looked down
the slope across to the road and the bridge and the gorge and the road and saw the
tank and waited for the next flash. It came almost at once with again no whish and in the
burst of it, with the smell of the high explosive, the dirt clods scattering and the steel
whirring off, he saw the big gray horse sit quietly down beside him as though it were a
horse in a circus. And then, looking at the horse sitting there, he heard the sound the
horse was making.
 Then Primitivo and Agustín had him under the armpits and were dragging him up the
last slope and the new joint in his leg let it swing any way the ground swung it. Once a
shell whished close over them and they dropped him and fell flat, but the dirt scattered
over them and and the metal sung off and they picked him up again. And then they had
him up to the shelter of the long draw in the timber where the horses were, and Maria,
Pilar and Pablo were standing over him.
 Maria was kneeling by him and saying, “Roberto, what hast thou?”
 He said, sweating heavily, “The left leg is broken, guapa.”
 “We will bind it up,” Pilar said. “Thou canst ride that.” She pointed to one of the horses
that was packed. “Cut off the load.”
 Robert Jordan saw Pablo shake his head and he nodded at him.
 “Get along,” he said. Then he said, “Listen, Pablo. Come here.”
 The sweat-streaked, bristly face bent down by him and Robert Jordan smelt the full
smell of Pablo.
 “Let us speak,” he said to Pilar and Maria. “I have to speak to Pablo.”
 “Does it hurt much?” Pablo asked. He was bending close over Robert Jordan.
 “No. I think the nerve is crushed. Listen. Get along. I am mucked, see? I will talk to the
girl for a moment. When I say to take her, take her. She will want to stay. I will only
speak to her for a moment.”
 “Clearly, there is not much time,” Pablo said.
 “Clearly.”
 “I think you would do better in the Republic,” Robert Jordan said.
 “Nay. I am for Gredos.”
 “Use thy head.”
 “Talk to her now,” Pablo said. “There is little time. I am sorry thou hast this, Inglés.”
 “Since I have it—” Robert Jordan said. “Let us not speak of it. But use thy head. Thou
hast much head. Use it.”
 “Why would I not?” said Pablo. “Talk now fast, Inglés. There is no time.”
 Pablo went over to the nearest tree and watched down the slope, across the slope
and up the road across the gorge. Pablo was looking at the gray horse on the slope with
true regret on his face and Pilar and Maria were with Robert Jordan where he sat
against the tree trunk.
 “Slit the trouser, will thee?” he said to Pilar. Maria crouched by him and did not speak.
The sun was on her hair and her face was twisted as a child’s contorts before it cries.
But she was not crying.
 Pilar took her knife and slit his trouser leg down below the lefthand pocket. Robert
“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway 247
Jordan spread the cloth with his hands and looked at the stretch of his thigh. Ten inches
below the hip joint there was a pointed, purple swelling like a sharp-peaked little tent
and as he touched it with his fingers he could feel the snapped-off thigh bone tight
against the skin. His leg was lying at an odd angle. He looked up at Pilar. Her face had
the same expression as Maria’s.
 “Anda,” he said to her. “Go.”
 She went away with her head down without saying anything nor looking back and
Robert Jordan could see her shoulders shaking.
 “Guapa,” he said to Maria and took hold of her two hands. “Listen. We will not be
going to Madrid—”
 Then she started to cry.
 “No, guapa, don’t,” he said. “Listen. We will not go to Madrid now but I go always with
thee wherever thou goest. Understand?”
 She said nothing and pushed her head against his cheek with her arms around him.
 “Listen to this well, rabbit,” he said. He knew there was a great hurry and he was
sweating very much, but this had to be said and understood. “Thou wilt go now, rabbit.
But I go with thee. As long as there is one of us there is both of us. Do you understand?”
 “Nay, I stay with thee.”
 “Nay, rabbit. What I do now I do alone. I could not do it well with thee. If thou goest
then I go, too. Do you not see how it is? Whichever one there is, is both.”
 “I will stay with thee.”
 “Nay, rabbit. Listen. That people cannot do together. Each one must do it alone. But if
thou goest then I go with thee. It is in that way that I go too. Thou wilt go now, I know.
For thou art good and kind. Thou wilt go now for us both.”
 “But it is easier if I stay with thee,” she said. “It is better for me.”
 “Yes. Therefore go for a favor. Do it for me since it is what thou canst do.”
 “But you don’t understand, Roberto. What about me? It is worse for me to go.”
 “Surely,” he said. “It is harder for thee. But I am thee also now.”
 She said nothing.
 He looked at her and he was sweating heavily and he spoke now, trying harder to do
something than he had ever tried in all his life.
 “Now you will go for us both,” he said. “You must not be selfish, rabbit. You must do
your duty now.”
 She shook her head.
 “You are me now,” he said. “Surely thou must feel it, rabbit.
 “Rabbit, listen,” he said. “Truly thus I go too. I swear it to thee.”
 She said nothing.
 “Now you see it,” he said. “Now I see it is clear. Now thou wilt go. Good. Now you are
going. Now you have said you will go.”
 She had said nothing.
 “Now I thank thee for it. Now you are going well and fast and far and we both go in
thee. Now put thy hand here. Now put thy head down. Nay, put it down. That is right.
Now I put my hand there. Good. Thou art so good. Now do not think more. Now art thou
doing what thou should. Now thou art obeying. Not me but us both. The me in thee. Now
you go for us both. Truly. We both go in thee now. This I have promised thee. Thou art
very good to go and very kind.”
 He jerked his head at Pablo, who was half-looking at him from the tree and Pablo
started over. He motioned with his thumb to Pilar.
 “We will go to Madrid another time, rabbit,” he said. “Truly. Now stand up and go and
we both go. Stand up. See?”
 “No,” she said and held him tight around the neck.
 He spoke now still calmly and reasonably but with great authority.
 “Stand up,” he said. “Thou art me too now. Thou art all there will be of me. Stand up.”
 She stood up slowly, crying, and with her head down. Then she dropped quickly
beside him and then stood up again, slowly and tiredly, as he said, “Stand up, guapa.”
“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway 248
 Pilar was holding her by the arm and she was standing there.
 “Vamonos,” Pilar said. “Dost lack anything, Inglés?” She looked at him and shook her
head.
 “No,” he said and went on talking to Maria.
 “There is no good-by, guapa, because we are not apart. That it should be good in the
Gredos. Go now. Go good. Nay,” he spoke now still calmly and reasonably as Pilar
walked the girl along. “Do not turn around. Put thy foot in. Yes. Thy foot in. Help her up,”
he said to Pilar. “Get her in the saddle. Swing up now.”
 He turned his head, sweating, and looked down the slope, then back toward where the
girl was in the saddle with Pilar by her and Pablo just behind. “Now go,” he said. “Go.”
 She started to look around. “Don’t look around,” Robert Jordan said. “Go.” And Pablo
hit the horse across the crupper with a hobbling strap and it looked as though Maria
tried to slip from the saddle but Pilar and Pablo were riding close up against her and
Pilar was holding her and the three horses were going up the draw.
 “Roberto,” Maria turned and shouted. “Let me stay! Let me stay!”
 “I am with thee,” Robert Jordan shouted. “I am with thee now. We are both there. Go!”
Then they were out of sight around the corner of the draw and he was soaking wet with
sweat and looking at nothing.
 Agustín was standing by him.
 “Do you want me to shoot thee, Inglés?” he asked, leaning down close. “Quieres? It is
nothing.”
 “No hace falta,” Robert Jordan said. “Get along. I am very well here.”
 “Me cago en la leche que me han dado!” Agustín said. He was crying so he could not
see Robert Jordan clearly. “Salud, Inglés.”
 “Salud, old one,” Robert Jordan said. He was looking down the slope now. “Look well
after the cropped head, wilt thou?”
 “There is no problem,” Agustín said. “Thou has what thou needest?”
 “There are very few shells for this máquina, so I will keep it,” Robert Jordan said.
“Thou canst now get more. For that other and the one of Pablo, yes.”
 “I cleaned out the barrel,” Agustín said. “Where thou plugged it in the dirt with the fall.”
 “What became of the pack-horse?”
 “The gypsy caught it.”
 Agustín was on the horse now but he did not want to go. He leaned far over toward
the tree where Robert Jordan lay.
 “Go on, viejo,” Robert Jordan said to him. “In war there are many things like this.”
 “Qué puta es Ia guerra,” Agustín said. “War is a bitchery.”
 “Yes, man, yes. But get on with thee.”
 “Salud, Inglés,” Agustín said, clenching his right fist.
 “Salud,” Robert Jordan said. “But get along, man.”
 Agustín wheeled his horse and brought his right fist down as though he cursed again
with the motion of it and rode up the draw. All the others had been out of sight long
before. He looked back where the draw turned in the timber and waved his fist. Robert
Jordan waved and then Agustín, too, was out of sight.. . . Robert Jordan looked down
the green slope of the hillside to the road and the bridge. I’m as well this way as any, he
thought. It wouldn’t be worth risking getting over on my belly yet, not as close as that
thing was to the surface, and I can see better this way.
 He felt empty and drained and exhausted from all of it and from them going and his
mouth tasted of bile. Now, finally and at last, there was no problem. however all of it had
been and however all of it would ever be now, for him, no longer was there any problem.
 They were all gone now and he was alone with his back against a tree. He looked
down across the green slope, seeing the gray horse where Agustín had shot him, and
on down the slope to the road with the timber-covered country behind it. Then he looked
at the bridge and across the bridge and watched the activity on the bridge and the road.
He could see the trucks now, all down the lower road. The gray of the trucks showed
through the trees. Then he looked back up the road to where it came down over the hill.
“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway 249
They will be coming soon now, he thought.
 Pilar will take care of her as well as any one can. You know that. Pablo must have a
sound plan or he would not have tried it. You do not have to worry about Pablo. It does
no good to think about Maria. Try to believe what you told her. That is the best. And who
says it is not true? Not you. You don’t say it, any more than you would say the things did
not happen that happened. Stay with what you believe now. Don’t get cynical. The time
is too short and you have just sent her away. Each one does what he can. You can do
nothing for yourself but perhaps you can do something for another. Well, we had all our
luck in four days. Not four days. It was afternoon when I first got there and it will not be
noon today. That makes not quite three days and three nights. Keep it accurate, he said.
Quite accurate.
 I think you better get down now, he thought. You better get fixed around some way
where you will be useful instead of leaning against this tree like a tramp. You have had
much luck. There are many worse things than this. Every one has to do this, one day or
another. You are not afraid of it once you know you have to do it, are you? No, he said,
truly. It was lucky the nerve was crushed, though. I cannot even feel that there is
anything below the break. He touched the lower part of his leg and it was as though it
were not part of his body.
 He looked down the hill slope again and he thought, I hate to leave it, is all. I hate to
leave it very much and I hope I have done some good in it. I have tried to with what
talent I had. Have, you mean. All right, have.
 I have fought for what I believed in for a year now. If we win here we will win
everywhere. The world is a fine place and worth the fighting for and I hate very much to
leave it. And you had a lot of luck, he told himself, to have had such a good life. You’ve
had just as good a life as grandfather’s though not as long. You’ve had as good a life as
any one because of these last days. You do not want to complain when you have been
so lucky. I wish there was some way to pass on what I’ve learned, though. Christ, I was
learning fast there at the end. I’d like to talk to Karkov. That is in Madrid. Just over the
hills there, and down across the plain. Down out of the gray rocks and the pines, the
heather and the gorse, across the yellow high plateau you see it rising white and
beautiful. That part is just as true as Pilar’s old women drinking the blood down at the
slaughterhouse. There’s no one thing that’s true. It’s all true. The way the planes are
beautiful whether they are ours or theirs. The hell they are, he thought.
 You take it easy, now, he said. Get turned over now while you still have time. Listen,
one thing. Do you remember? Pilar and the hand? Do you believe that crap? No, he
said. Not with everything that’s happened? No, I don’t believe it. She was nice about it
early this morning before the show started. She was afraid maybe I believed it. I don’t,
though. But she does. They see something. Or they feel something. Like a bird dog.
What about extra-sensory perception? What about obscenity? he said. She wouldn’t say
good-by, he thought, because she knew if she did Maria would never go. That Pilar. Get
yourself turned over, Jordan. But he was reluctant to try it.
 Then he remembered that he had the small flask in his hip pocket and he thought, I’ll
take a good spot of the giant killer and then I’ll try it. But the flask was not there when he
felt for it. Then he felt that much more alone because he knew there was not going to be
even that. I guess I’d counted on that, he said.
 Do you suppose Pablo took it? Don’t be silly. You must have lost it at the bridge.
“Come on now, Jordan,” he said. “Over you go.”
 Then he took hold of his left leg with both hands and pulled on it hard, pulling toward
the foot while he lay down beside the tree he had been resting his back against. Then
lying flat and pulling hard on the leg, so the broken end of the bone would not come up
and cut through the thigh, he turned slowly around on his rump until the back of his head
was facing downhill. Then with his broken leg, held by both hands, uphill, he put the sole
of his right foot against the instep of his left foot and pressed hard while he rolled,
sweating, over onto his face and chest. He got onto his elbows, stretched the left leg
well behind him with both hands and a far, sweating, push with the right foot and there
“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway 250
he was. He felt with his fingers on the left thigh and it was all right. The bone end had
not punctured the skin and the broken end was well into the muscle now.
 The big nerve must have been truly smashed when that damned horse rolled on it, he
thought. It truly doesn’t hurt at all. Except now in certain changes of positions. That’s
when the bone pinches something else. You see? he said. You see what luck is? You
didn’t need the giant killer at all.
 He reached over for the submachine gun, took the clip out that was in the magazine,
felt in his pocket for clips, opened the action and looked through the barrel, put the clip
back into the groove of the magazine until it clicked, and then looked down the hill slope.
Maybe half an hour, he thought. Now take it easy.
 Then he looked at the hillside and he looked at the pines and he tried not to think at
all.
 Then he looked at the stream and he remembered how it had been under the bridge in
the cool of the shadow. I wish they would come, he thought. I do not want to get in any
sort of mixed-up state before they come.
 Who do you suppose has it easier? Ones with religion or just taking it straight? It
comforts them very much but we know there is no thing to fear. It is only missing it that’s
bad. Dying is only bad when it takes a long time and hurts so much that it humiliates
you. That is where you have all the luck, see? You don’t have any of that.
 It’s wonderful they’ve got away. I don’t mind this at all now they are away. It is sort of
the way I said. It is really very much that way. Look how different it would be if they were
all scattered out across that hill where that gray horse is. Or if we were all cooped up
here waiting for it. No. They’re gone. They’re away. Now if the attack were only a
success. What do you want? Everything. I want everything and I will take whatever I get.
If this attack is no good another one will be. I never noticed when the planes came back.
God, that was lucky I could make her go.
 I’d like to tell grandfather about this one. I’ll bet he never had to go over and find his
people and do a show like this. How do you know? He may have done fifty. No, he said.
Be accurate. Nobody did any fifty like this one. Nobody did five. Nobody did one maybe
not just like this. Sure. They must have.
 I wish they would come now, he said. I wish they would come right now because the
leg is starting to hurt now. It must be the swelling.
 We were going awfully good when that thing hit us, he thought. But it was only luck it
didn’t come while I was under the bridge. When a thing is wrong something’s bound to
happen. You were bitched when they gave Golz those orders. That was what you knew
and it was probably that which Pilar felt. But later on we will have these things much
better organized. We ought to have portable short wave transmitters. Yes, there’s a lot
of things we ought to have. I ought to carry a spare leg, too.
 He grinned at that sweatily because the leg, where the big nerve had been bruised by
the fall, was hurting badly now. Oh, let them come, he said. I don’t want to do that
business that my father did. I will do it all right but I’d much prefer not to have to. I’m
against that. Don’t think about that. Don’t think at all. I wish the bastards would come, he
said. I wish so very much they’d come.
 His leg was hurting very badly now. The pain had started suddenly with the swelling
after he had moved and he said, Maybe I’ll just do it now. I guess I’m not awfully good at
pain. Listen, if I do that now you wouldn’t misunderstand, would you? Who are you
talking to? Nobody, he said. Grandfather, I guess. No. Nobody. Oh bloody it, I wish that
they would come.
 Listen, I may have to do that because if I pass out or anything like that I am no good at
all and if they bring me to they will ask me a lot of questions and do things and all and
that is no good. It’s much best not to have them do those things. So why wouldn’t it be
all right to just do it now and then the whole thing would be over with? Because oh,
listen, yes, listen, let them come now.
 You’re not good at this, Jordan, he said. Not so good at this. And who is so good at
this? I don’t know and I don’t really care right now. But you are not. That’s right. You’re
“For Whom the Bell Tolls” By Ernest Hemingway 251
not at all. Oh not at all, at all. I think it would be all right to do it now? Don’t you?
 No, it isn’t. Because there is something you can do yet. As long as you know what it is
you have to do it. As long as you remember what it is you have to wait for that. Come
on. Let them come. Let them come. Let them come!
 Think about them being away, he said. Think about them going through the timber.
Think about them crossing a creek. Think about them riding through the heather. Think
about them going up the slope. Think about them O.K. tonight. Think about them
travelling, all night. Think about them hiding up tomorrow. Think about them. God damn
it, think about them. That’s just as far as I can think about them, he said.
 Think about Montana. I can’t. Think about Madrid. I can’t. Think about a cool drink of
water. All right. That’s what it will be like. Like a cool drink of water. You’re a liar. It will
just be nothing. That’s all it will be. Just nothing. Then do it. Do it. Do it now. It’s all right
to do it now. Go on and do it now. No, you have to wait. What for? You know all right.
Then wait.
 I can’t wait any longer now, he said. If I wait any longer I’ll pass out. I know because
I’ve felt it starting to go three times now and I’ve held it. I held it all right. But I don’t know
about any more. What I think is you’ve got an internal hemorrhage there from where that
thigh bone’s cut around inside. Especially on that turning business. That makes the
swelling and that’s what weakens you and makes you start to pass. It would be all right
to do it now. Really, I’m telling you that it would be all right.
 And if you wait and hold them up even a little while or just get the officer that may
make all the difference. One thing well done can make—
 All right, he said. And he lay very quietly and tried to hold on to himself that he felt
slipping away from himself as you feel snow starting to slip sometimes on a mountain
slope, and he said, now quietly, then let me last until they come.
 Robert Jordan’s luck held very good because he saw, just then, the cavalry ride out of
the timber and cross the road. He watched them coming riding up the slope. He saw the
trooper who stopped by the gray horse and shouted to the officer who rode over to him.
He watched them both looking down at the gray horse. They recognized him of course.
He and his rider had been missing since the early morning of the day before.
 Robert Jordan saw them there on the slope, close to him now, and below he saw the
road and the bridge and the long lines of vehicles below it. He was completely
integrated now and he took a good long look at everything. Then he looked up at the
sky. There were big white clouds in it. He touched the palm of his hand against the pine
needles where he lay and he touched the bark of the pine trunk that he lay behind.
 Then he rested easily as he could with his two elbows in the pine needles and the
muzzle of the submachine gun resting against the trunk of the pine tree.
 As the officer came trotting now on the trail of the horses of the band he would pass
twenty yards below where Robert Jordan lay. At that distance there would be no
problem. The officer was Lieutenant Berrendo. He had come up from La Granja when
they had been ordered up after the first report of the attack on the lower post. They had
ridden hard and had then had to swing back, because the bridge had been blown, to
cross the gorge high above and come around through the timber. Their horses were wet
and blown and they had to be urged into the trot.
 Lieutenant Berrendo, watching the trail, came riding up, his thin face serious and
grave. His submachine gun lay across his saddle in the crook of his left arm. Robert
Jordan lay behind the tree, holding onto himself very carefully and delicately to keep his
hands steady. He was waiting until the officer reached the sunlit place where the first
trees of the pine forest joined the green slope of the meadow. He could feel his heart
beating against the pine needle floor of the forest. 



1
In the late summer of that year we lived in a house in a village that looked across the
river and the plain to the mountains. In the bed of the river there were pebbles and
boulders, dry and white in the sun, and the water was clear and swiftly moving and
blue in the channels. Troops went by the house and down the road and the dust they
raised powdered the leaves of the trees. The trunks of the trees too were dusty and
the leaves fell early that year and we saw the troops marching along the road and
the dust rising and leaves, stirred by the breeze, falling and the soldiers marching
and afterward the road bare and white except for the leaves. The plain was rich with
crops; there were many orchards of fruit trees and beyond the plain the mountains
were brown and bare. There was fighting in the mountains and at night we could see
the flashes from the artillery. In the dark it was like summer lightning, but the nights
were cool and there was not the feeling of a storm coming. Sometimes in the dark
we heard the troops marching under the window and guns going past pulled by
motor-tractors. There was much traffic at night and many mules on the roads with
boxes of ammunition on each side of their pack-saddles and gray motor trucks that
carried men, and other trucks with loads covered with canvas that moved slower in
the traffic. There were big guns too that passed in the day drawn by tractors, the
long barrels of the guns covered with green branches and green leafy branches and
vines laid over the tractors. To the north we could look across a valley and see a
forest of chestnut trees and behind it another mountain on this side of the river.
There was fighting for that mountain too, but it was not successful, and in the fall
when the rains came the leaves all fell from the chestnut trees and the branches
were bare and the trunks black with rain. The vineyards were thin and barebranched too and all the country wet and brown and dead with the autumn. There
were mists over the river and clouds on the mountain and the trucks splashed mud
on the road and the troops were muddy and wet in their capes; their rifles were wet
and under their capes the two leather cartridge-boxes on the front of the belts, gray
leather boxes heavy with the packs of clips of thin, long 6.5 mm. cartridges, bulged
forward under the capes so that the men, passing on the road, marched as though
they were six months gone with child. There were small gray motor cars that passed
going very fast; usually there was an officer on the seat with the driver and more
officers in the back seat. They splashed more mud than the camions even and if one
of the officers in the back was very small and sitting between two generals, he
himself so small that you could not see his face but only the top of his cap and his
narrow back, and if the car went especially fast it was probably the King. He lived in
Udine and came out in this way nearly every day to see how things were going, and
things went very badly. At the start of the winter came the permanent rain and with
the rain came the cholera. But it was checked and in the end only seven thousand
died of it in the army.
2
The next year there were many victories. The mountain that was beyond the valley
and the hillside where the chestnut forest grew was captured and there were
victories beyond the plain on the plateau to the south and we crossed the river in
August and lived in a house in Gorizia that had a fountain and many thick shady
trees in a walled garden and a wistaria vine purple on the side of the house. Now the
fighting was in the next mountains beyond and was not a mile away. The town was
very nice and our house was very fine. The river ran behind us and the town had
been captured very handsomely but the mountains beyond it could not be taken and
I was very glad the Austrians seemed to want to come back to the town some time, if
the war should end, because they did not bombard it to destroy it but only a little in a
military way. People
“A Farewell to Arms” By Ernest Hemingway 3
lived on in it and there were hospitals and cafés and artillery up side streets and two
bawdy houses, one for troops and one for officers, and with the end of the summer,
the cool nights, the fighting in the mountains beyond the town, the shell-marked iron
of the railway bridge, the smashed tunnel by the river where the fighting had been,
the trees around the square and the long avenue of trees that led to the square;
these with there being girls in the town, the King passing in his motor car, sometimes
now seeing his face and little long necked body and gray beard like a goat’s chin tuft;
all these with the sudden interiors of houses that had lost a wall through shelling,
with plaster and rubble in their gardens and sometimes in the street, and the whole
thing going well on the Carso made the fall very different from the last fall when we
had been in the country. The war was changed too. The forest of oak trees on the
mountain beyond the town was gone. The forest had been green in the summer
when we had come into the town but now there were the stumps and the broken
trunks and the ground torn up, and one day at the end of the fall when I was out
where the oak forest had been I saw a cloud coming over the mountain. It came very
fast and the sun went a dull yellow and then everything was gray and the sky was
covered and the cloud came on down the mountain and suddenly we were in it and it
was snow. The snow slanted across the wind, the bare ground was covered, the
stumps of trees projected, there was snow on the guns and there were paths in the
snow going back to the latrines behind trenches. Later, below in the town, I watched
the snow falling, looking out of the window of the bawdy house, the house for
officers, where I sat with a friend and two glasses drinking a bottle of Asti, and,
looking out at the snow falling slowly and heavily, we knew it was all over for that
year. Up the river the mountains had not been taken; none of the mountains beyond
the river had been taken. That was all left for next year. My friend saw the priest from
our mess going by in the street, walking carefully in the slush, and pounded on the
window to attract his attention. The priest looked up. He saw us and smiled. My
friend motioned for him to come in. The priest shook his head and went on. That
night in the mess after the spaghetti course, which every one ate very quickly and
seriously, lifting the spaghetti on the fork until the loose strands hung clear then
lowering it into the mouth, or else using a continuous lift and sucking into the mouth,
helping ourselves to wine from the grass-covered gallon flask; it swung in a metal
cradle and you pulled the neck of the flask down with the forefinger and the wine,
clear red, tannic and lovely, poured out into the glass held with the same hand; after
this course, the captain commenced picking on the priest. The priest was young and
blushed easily and wore a uniform like the rest of us but with a cross in dark red
velvet above the left breast pocket of his gray tunic. The captain spoke pidgin Italian
for my doubtful benefit, in order that I might understand perfectly, that nothing should
be lost. “Priest to-day with girls,” the captain said looking at the priest and at me. The
priest smiled and blushed and shook his head. This captain baited him often. “Not
true?” asked the captain. “To-day I see priest with girls.” “No,” said the priest. The
other officers were amused at the baiting. “Priest not with girls,” went on the captain.
“Priest never with girls,” he explained to me. He took my glass and filled it, looking at
my eyes all the time, but not losing sight of the priest. “Priest every night five against
one.” Every one at the table laughed. “You understand? Priest every night five
against one.” He made a gesture and laughed loudly. The priest accepted it as a
joke. “The Pope wants the Austrians to win the war,” the major said. “He loves Franz
Joseph. That’s where the money comes from. I am an atheist.” “Did you ever read
the ‘Black Pig’?” asked the lieutenant. “I will get you a copy. It was that which shook
my faith.” “It is a filthy and vile book,” said the priest. “You do not really like it.” “It is
very valuable,” said the lieutenant. “It tells you about those priests. You will like

“A Farewell to Arms” By Ernest Hemingway 4

it,” he said to me. I smiled at the priest and he smiled back across the candle-light.
“Don’t you read it,” he said. “I will get it for you,” said the lieutenant. “All thinking men
are atheists,” the major said. “I do not believe in the Free Masons however.” “I
believe in the Free Masons,” the lieutenant said. “It is a noble organization.” Some
one came in and as the door opened I could see the snow falling. “There will be no
more offensive now that the snow has come,” I said. “Certainly not,” said the major.
“You should go on leave. You should go to Rome, Naples, Sicily—” “He should visit
Amalfi,” said the lieutenant. “I will write you cards to my family in Amalfi. They will
love you like a son.” “He should go to Palermo.” “He ought to go to Capri.” “I would
like you to see Abruzzi and visit my family at Capracotta,” said the priest. “Listen to
him talk about the Abruzzi. There’s more snow there than here. He doesn’t want to
see peasants. Let him go to centres of culture and civilization.” “He should have fine
girls. I will give you the addresses of places in Naples. Beautiful young girls—
accompanied by their mothers. Ha! Ha! Ha!” The captain spread his hand open, the
thumb up and fingers outspread as when you make shadow pictures. There was a
shadow from his hand on the wall. He spoke again in pidgin Italian. “You go away
like this,” he pointed to the thumb, “and come back like this,” he touched the little
finger. Every one laughed. “Look,” said the captain. He spread the hand again. Again
the candle-light made its shadows on the wall. He started with the upright thumb and
named in their order the thumb and four fingers, “soto-tenente (the thumb), tenente
(first finger), capitano (next finger), maggiore (next to the little finger), and
tenentecolonello (the little finger). You go away soto-tenente! You come back sotocolonello!” They all laughed. The captain was having a great success with finger
games. He looked at the priest and shouted, “Every night priest five against one!”
They all laughed again. “You must go on leave at once,” the major said. “I would like
to go with you and show you things,” the lieutenant said. “When you come back
bring a phonograph.” “Bring good opera disks.” “Bring Caruso.” “Don’t bring Caruso.
He bellows.” “Don’t you wish you could bellow like him?” “He bellows. I say he
bellows!” “I would like you to go to Abruzzi,” the priest said. The others were
shouting. “There is good hunting. You would like the people and though it is cold it is
clear and dry. You could stay with my family. My father is a famous hunter.” “Come
on,” said the captain. “We go whorehouse before it shuts.” “Good-night,” I said to the
priest. “Good-night,” he said.
3
When I came back to the front we still lived in that town. There were many more
guns in the country around and the spring had come. The fields were green and
there were small green shoots on the vines, the trees along the road had small
leaves and a breeze came from the sea. I saw the town with the hill and the old
castle above it in a cup in the hills with the mountains beyond, brown mountains with
a little green on their slopes. In the town there were more guns, there were some
new hospitals, you met British men and sometimes women, on the street, and a few
more houses had been hit by shell fire. Jt was warm and like the spring and I walked
down the alleyway of trees, warmed from
“A Farewell to Arms” By Ernest Hemingway 5
the sun on the wall, and found we still lived in the same house and that it all looked
the same as when I had left it. The door was open, there was a soldier sitting on a
bench outside in the sun, an ambulance was waiting by the side door and inside the
door, as I went in, there was the smell of marble floors and hospital. It was all as I
had left it except that now it was spring. I looked in the door of the big room and saw
the major sitting at his desk, the window open and the sunlight coming into the room.
He did not see me and I did not know whether to go in and report or go upstairs first
and clean up. I decided to go on upstairs. The room I shared with the lieutenant
Rinaldi looked out on the courtyard. The window was open, my bed was made up
with blankets and my things hung on the wall, the gas mask in an oblong tin can, the
steel helmet on the same peg. At the foot of the bed was my flat trunk, and my winter
boots, the leather shiny with oil, were on the trunk. My Austrian sniper’s rifle with its
blued octagon barrel and the lovely dark walnut, cheek-fitted, schutzen stock, hung
over the two beds. The telescope that fitted it was, I remembered, locked in the
trunk. The lieutenant, Rinaldi, lay asleep on the other bed. He woke when he heard
me in the room and sat up. “Ciaou!” he said. “What kind of time did you have?”
“Magnificent.” We shook hands and he put his arm around my neck and kissed me.
“Oughf,” I said. “You’re dirty,” he said. “You ought to wash. Where did you go and
what did you do? Tell me everything at once.” “I went everywhere. Milan, Florence,
Rome, Naples, Villa San Giovanni, Messina, Taormina—” “You talk like a time-table.
Did you have any beautiful adventures?” “Yes.” “Where?” “Milano, Firenze, Roma,
Napoli—” “That’s enough. Tell me really what was the best.” “In Milano.” “That was
because it was first. Where did you meet her? In the Cova? Where did you go? How
did you feel? Tell me everything at once. Did you stay all night?” “Yes.” “That’s
nothing. Here now we have beautiful girls. New girls never been to the front before.”
“Wonderful.” “You don’t believe me? We will go now this afternoon and see. And in
the town we have beautiful English girls. I am now in love with Miss Barkley. I will
take you to call. I will probably marry Miss Barkley.” “I have to get washed and
report. Doesn’t anybody work now?” “Since you are gone we have nothing but
frostbites, chilblains, jaundice, gonorrhea, self-inflicted wounds, pneumonia and hard
and soft chancres. Every week some one gets wounded by rock fragments. There
are a few real wounded. Next week the war starts again. Perhaps it start again. They
say so. Do you think I would do right to marry Miss Barkley—after the war of
course?” “Absolutely,” I said and poured the basin full of water. “To-night you will tell
me everything,” said Rinaldi. “Now I must go back to sleep to be fresh and beautiful
for Miss Barkley.” I took off my tunic and shirt and washed in the cold water in the
basin. While I rubbed myself with a towel I looked around the room and out the
window and at Rinaldi lying with his eyes closed on the bed. He was good-looking,
was my age, and he came from Amalfi. He loved being a surgeon and we were great
friends. While I was looking at him he opened his eyes. “Have you any money?”
“Yes.”

“A Farewell to Arms” By Ernest Hemingway 6

“Loan me fifty lire.” I dried my hands and took out my pocket-book from the inside of
my tunic hanging on the wall. Rinaldi took the note, folded it without rising from the
bed and slid it in his breeches pocket. He smiled, “I must make on Miss Barkley the
impression of a man of sufficient wealth. You are my great and good friend and
financial protector.” “Go to hell,” I said. That night at the mess I sat next to the priest
and he was disappointed and suddenly hurt that I had not gone to the Abruzzi. He
had written to his father that I was coming and they had made preparations. I myself
felt as badly as he did and could not understand why I had not gone. It was what I
had wanted to do and I tried to explain how one thing had led to another and finally
he saw it and understood that I had really wanted to go and it was almost all right. I
had drunk much wine and afterward coffee and Strega and I explained, winefully,
how we did not do the things we wanted to do; we never did such things. We two
were talking while the others argued. I had wanted to go to Abruzzi. I had gone to no
place where the roads were frozen and hard as iron, where it was clear cold and dry
and the snow was dry and powdery and hare-tracks in the snow and the peasants
took off their hats and called you Lord and there was good hunting. I had gone to no
such place but to the smoke of cafés and nights when the room whirled and you
needed to look at the wall to make it stop, nights in bed, drunk, when you knew that
that was all there was, and the strange excitement of waking and not knowing who it
was with you, and the world all unreal in the dark and so exciting that you must
resume again unknowing and not caring in the night, sure that this was all and all
and all and not caring. Suddenly to care very much and to sleep to wake with it
sometimes morning and all that had been there gone and everything sharp and hard
and clear and sometimes a dispute about the cost. Sometimes still pleasant and
fond and warm and breakfast and lunch. Sometimes all niceness gone and glad to
get out on the street but always another day starting and then another night. I tried to
tell about the night and the difference between the night and the day and how the
night was better unless the day was very clean and cold and I could not tell it; as I
cannot tell it now. But if you have had it you know. He had not had it but he
understood that I had really wanted to go to the Abruzzi but had not gone and we
were still friends, with many tastes alike, but with the difference between us. He had
always known what I did not know and what, when I learned it, I was always able to
forget. But I did not know that then, although I learned it later. In the meantime we
were all at the mess, the meal was finished, and the argument went on. We two
stopped talking and the captain shouted, “Priest not happy. Priest not happy without
girls.” “I am happy,” said the priest. “Priest not happy. Priest wants Austrians to win
the war,” the captain said. The others listened. The priest shook his head. “No,” he
said. “Priest wants us never to attack. Don’t you want us never to attack?” “No. If
there is a war I suppose we must attack.” “Must attack. Shall attack!” The priest
nodded. “Leave him alone,” the major said. “He’s all right.” “He can’t do anything
about it anyway,” the captain said. We all got up and left the table.
4
The battery in the next garden woke me in the morning and I saw the sun coming
through the window and got out of the bed. I went to the window and looked out. The
gravel paths were moist and the grass was wet with dew. The battery fired twice and
the air came each time like a blow and shook the window and made the front of my
pajamas
“A Farewell to Arms” By Ernest Hemingway 7

flap. I could not see the guns but they were evidently firing directly over us. It was a
nuisance to have them there but it was a comfort that they were no bigger. As I
looked out at the garden I heard a motor truck starting on the road. I dressed, went
downstairs, had some coffee in the kitchen and went out to the garage. Ten cars
were lined up side by side under the long shed. They were top-heavy, blunt-nosed
ambulances, painted gray and built like moving-vans. The mechanics were working
on one out in the yard. Three others were up in the mountains at dressing stations.
“Do they ever shell that battery?” Tasked one of the mechanics. “No, Signor
Tenente. It is protected by the little hill.” “How’s everything?” “Not so bad. This
machine is no good but the others march.” He stopped working and smiled. “Were
you on permission?” “Yes.” He wiped his hands on his jumper and grinned. “You
have a good time?” The others all grinned too. “Fine,” I said. “What’s the matter with
this machine?” “It’s no good. One thing after another.” “What’s the matter now?”
“New rings.” I left them working, the car looking disgraced and empty with the engine
open and parts spread on the work bench, and went in under the shed and looked at
each of the cars. They were moderately clean, a few freshly washed, the others
dusty. I looked at the tires carefully, looking for cuts or stone bruises. Everything
seemed in good condition. It evidently made no difference whether I was there to
look after things or not. I had imagined that the condition of the cars, whether or not
things were obtainable, the smooth functioning of the business of removing wounded
and sick from the dressing stations, hauling them back from the mountains to the
clearing station and then distributing them to the hospitals named on their papers,
depended to a considerable extent on myself. Evidently it did not matter whether I
was there or not. “Has there been any trouble getting parts?” I asked the sergeant
mechanic. “No, Signor Tenente.” “Where is the gasoline park now?” “At the same
place.” “Good,” I said and went back to the house and drank another bowl of coffee
at the mess table. The coffee was a pale gray and sweet with condensed milk.
Outside the window it was a lovely spring morning. There was that beginning of a
feeling of dryness in the nose that meant the day would be hot later on. That day I
visited the posts in the mountains and was back in town late in the afternoon. The
whole thing seemed to run better while I was away. The offensive was going to start
again I heard. The division for which we worked were to attack at a place up the river
and the major told me that I would see about the posts for during the attack. The
attack would cross the river up above the narrow gorge and spread up the hillside.
The posts for the cars would have to be as near the river as they could get and keep
covered. They would, of course, be selected by the infantry but we were supposed to
work it out. It was one of those things that gave you a false feeling of soldiering. I
was very dusty and dirty and went up to my room to wash. Rinaldi was sitting on the
bed with a copy of Hugo’s English grammar. He was dressed, wore his black boots,
and his hair shone. “Splendid,” he said when he saw me. “You will come with me to
see Miss Barkley.” “No. “Yes. You will please come and make me a good impression
on her.” “All right. Wait till I get cleaned up.” “Wash up and come as you are.” I
washed, brushed my hair and we started.

“A Farewell to Arms” By Ernest Hemingway 8

“Wait a minute,” Rinaldi said. “Perhaps we should have a drink.” He opened his trunk
and took out a bottle. “Not Strega,” I said. “No. Grappa.” “All right.” He poured two
glasses and we touched them, first fingers extended. The grappa was very strong.
“Another?” “All right,” I said. We drank the second grappa, Rinaldi put away the
bottle and we went down the stairs. It was hot walking through the town but the sun
was starting to go down and it was very pleasant. The British hospital was a big villa
built by Germans before the war. Miss Barkley was in the garden. Another nurse was
with her. We saw their white uniforms through the trees and walked toward them.
Rinaldi saluted. I saluted too but more moderately. “How do you do?” Miss Barkley
said. “You’re not an Italian, are you?” “Oh, no.” Rinaldi was talking with the other
nurse. They were laughing. “What an odd thing—to be in the Italian army.” “It’s not
really the army. It’s only the ambulance.” “It’s very odd though. Why did you do it?” “I
don’t know,” I said. “There isn’t always an explanation for everything.” “Oh, isn’t
there? I was brought up to think there was.” “That’s awfully nice.” “Do we have to go
on and talk this way?” “No,” I said. “That’s a relief. Isn’t it?” “What is the stick?” I
asked. Miss Barkley was quite tall. She wore what seemed to me to be a nurse’s
uniform, was blonde and had a tawny skin and gray eyes. I thought she was very
beautiful. She was carrying a thin rattan stick like a toy riding-crop, bound in leather.
“It belonged to a boy who was killed last year.” “I’m awfully sorry.” “He was a very
nice boy. He was going to marry me and he was killed in the Somme.” “It was a
ghastly show.” “Were you there?” “No.” “I’ve heard about it,” she said. “There’s not
really any war of that sort down here. They sent me the little stick. His mother sent it
to me. They returned it with his things.” “Had you been engaged long?” “Eight years.
We grew up together.” “And why didn’t you marry?” “I don’t know,” she said. “I was a
fool not to. I could have given him that anyway. But I thought it would be bad for
him.” “I see.” “Have you ever loved any one?” “No,” I said. We sat down on a bench
and I looked at her. “You have beautiful hair,” I said. “Do you like it?” “Very much.” “I
was going to cut it all off when he died.” “No.” “I wanted to do something for him. You
see I didn’t care about the other thing and he could have had it all. He could have
had anything he wanted if I would have known. I would have married him or
anything. I know all about it now. But then he wanted to go to

“A Farewell to Arms” By Ernest Hemingway 9

war and I didn’t know.” I did not say anything. “I didn’t know about anything then. I
thought it would be worse for him. I thought perhaps he couldn’t stand it and then of
course he was killed and that was the end of it.” “I don’t know.” “Oh, yes,” she said.
“That’s the end of it.” We looked at Rinaldi talking with the other nurse. “What is her
name?” “Ferguson. Helen Ferguson. Your friend is a doctor, isn’t he?” “Yes. He’s
very good.” “That’s splendid. You rarely find any one any good this close to the front.
This is close to the front, isn’t it?” “Quite.” “It’s a silly front,” she said. “But it’s very
beautiful. Are they going to have an offensive?” “Yes.” “Then we’ll have to work.
There’s no work now.” “Have you done nursing long?” “Since the end of ‘fifteen. I
started when he did. I remember having a silly idea he might come to the hospital
where I was. With a sabre cut, I suppose, and a bandage around his head. Or shot
through the shoulder. Something picturesque.” “This is the picturesque front,” I said.
“Yes,” she said. “People can’t realize what France is like. If they did, it couldn’t all go
on. He didn’t have a sabre cut. They blew him all to bits.” I didn’t say anything. “Do
you suppose it will always go on?” “No.” “What’s to stop it?” “It will crack
somewhere.” “We’ll crack. We’ll crack in France. They can’t go on doing things like
the Somme and not crack.” “They won’t crack here,” I said. “You think not?” “No.
They did very well last summer.” “They may crack,” she said. “Anybody may crack.”
“The Germans too.” “No,” she said. “I think not.” We went over toward Rinaldi and
Miss Ferguson. “You love Italy?” Rinaldi asked Miss Ferguson in English. “Quite
well.” “No understand,” Rinaldi shook his head. “Abbastanza bene,” I translated. He
shook his head. “That is not good. You love England?” “Not too well. I’m Scotch, you
see.” Rinaldi looked at me blankly. “She’s Scotch, so she loves Scotland better than
England,” I said in Italian. “But Scotland is England.” I translated this for Miss
Ferguson. “Pas encore,” said Miss Ferguson. “Not really?” “Never. We do not like
the English.” “Not like the English? Not like Miss Barkley?” “Oh, that’s different. You
mustn’t take everything so literally.” After a while we said good-night and left.
Walking home Rinaldi said, “Miss Barkley

“A Farewell to Arms” By Ernest Hemingway 10

prefers you to me. That is very clear. But the little Scotch one is very nice.” “Very,” I
said. I had not noticed her. “You like her?” “No,” said Rinaldi.
5
The next afternoon I went to call on Miss Barkley again. She was not in the garden
and I went to the side door of the villa where the ambulances drove up. Inside I saw
the head nurse, who said Miss Barkley was on duty—”there’s a war on, you know.” I
said I knew. “You’re the American in the Italian army?” she asked. “Yes, ma’am.”
“How did you happen to do that? Why didn’t you join up with us?” “I don’t know,” I
said. “Could I join now?” “I’m afraid not now. Tell me. Why did you join up with the
Italians?” “I was in Italy,” I said, “and I spoke Italian.” “Oh,” she said. “I’m learning it.
It’s beautiful language.” “Somebody said you should be able to learn it in two weeks.”
“Oh, I’ll not learn it in two weeks. I’ve studied it for months now. You may come and
see her after seven o’clock if you wish. She’ll be off then. But don’t bring a lot of
Italians.” “Not even for the beautiful language?” “No. Nor for the beautiful uniforms.”
“Good evening,” I said. “A rivederci, Tenente.” “A rivederla.” I saluted and went out. It
was impossible to salute foreigners as an Italian, without embarrassment. The Italian
salute never seemed made for export. The day had been hot. I had been up the river
to the bridgehead at Plava. It was there that the offensive was to begin. It had been
impossible to advance on the far side the year before because there was only one
road leading down from the pass to the pontoon bridge and it was under machinegun and shell fire for nearly a mile. It was not wide enough either to carry all the
transport for an offensive and the Austrians could make a shambles out of it. But the
Italians had crossed and spread out a little way on the far side to hold about a mile
and a half on the Austrian side of the river. It was a nasty place and the Austrians
should not have let them hold it. I suppose it was mutual tolerance because the
Austrians still kept a bridgehead further down the river. The Austrian trenches were
above on the hillside only a few yards from the Italian lines. There had been a little
town but it was all rubble. There was what was left of a railway station and a
smashed permanent bridge that could not be repaired and used because it was in
plain sight. I went along the narrow road down toward the river, left the car at the
dressing station under the hill, crossed the pontoon bridge, which was protected by a
shoulder of the mountain, and went through the trenches in the smashed-down town
and along the edge of the slope. Everybody was in the dugouts. There were racks of
rockets standing to be touched off to call for help from the artillery or to signal with if
the telephone wires were cut. It was quiet, hot and dirty. I looked across the wire at
the Austrian lines. Nobody was in sight. I had a drink with a captain that I knew in
one of the dugouts and went back across the bridge. A new wide road was being
finished that would go over the mountain and zig-zag down to the bridge. When this
road was finished the offensive would start. It came down through the forest in sharp
turns. The system was to bring everything down the new road and take the empty
trucks, carts and loaded ambulances and all returning traffic up the old narrow road.
The dressing station was on the Austrian side of the river under the edge of the hill
and stretcher-bearers would bring the wounded back across the pontoon bridge. It
would be the same when the offensive started. As far as I could make out the
“A Farewell to Arms” By Ernest Hemingway 11
last mile or so of the new road where it started to level out would be able to be
shelled steadily by the Austrians. It looked as though it might be a mess. But I found
a place where the cars would be sheltered after they passed that last badlooking bit
and could wait for the wounded to be brought across the pontoon bridge. I would
have liked to drive over the new road but it was not yet finished. It looked wide and
well made with a good grade and the turns looked very impressive where you could
see them through openings in the forest on the mountain side. The cars would be all
right with their good metal-to-metal brakes and anyway, coming down, they would
not be loaded. I drove back up the narrow road. Two carabinieri held the car up. A
shell had fallen and while we waited three others fell up the road. They were
seventy-sevens and came with a whishing rush of air, a hard bright burst and flash
and then gray smoke that blew across the road. The carabinieri waved us to go on.
Passing where the shells had landed I avoided the small broken places and smelled
the high explosive and the smell of blasted clay and stone and freshly shattered flint.
I drove back to Gorizia and our villa and, as I said, went to call on Miss Barkley, who
was on duty. At dinner I ate very quickly and left for the villa where the British had
their hospital. It was really very large and beautiful and there were fine trees in the
grounds. Miss Barkley was sitting on a bench in the garden. Miss Ferguson was with
her. They seemed glad to see me and in a little while Miss Ferguson excused herself
and went away. “I’ll leave you two,” she said. “You get along very well without me.”
“Don’t go, Helen,” Miss Barkley said. “I’d really rather. I must write some letters.”
“Good-night,” I said. “Good-night, Mr. Henry.” “Don’t write anything that will bother
the censor.” “Don’t worry. I only write about what a beautiful place we live in and how
brave the Italians are.” “That way you’ll be decorated.” “That will be nice. Good-night,
Catherine.” “I’ll see you in a little while,” Miss Barkley said. Miss Ferguson walked
away in the dark. “She’s nice,” I said. “Oh, yes, she’s very nice. She’s a nurse.”
“Aren’t you a nurse?” “Oh, no. I’m something called a V. A. D. We work very hard but
no one trusts us.” “Why not?” “They don’t trust us when there’s nothing going on.
When there is really work they trust us.” “What is the difference?” “A nurse is like a
doctor. It takes a long time to be. A V. A. D. is a short cut.” “I see.” “The Italians
didn’t want women so near the front. So we’re all on very special behavior. We don’t
go out.” “I can come here though.” “Oh, yes. We’re not cloistered.” “Let’s drop the
war.” “It’s very hard. There’s no place to drop it.” “Let’s drop it anyway.” “All right.”
We looked at each other in the dark. I thought she was very beautiful and I took her
hand. She let me take it and I held it and put my arm around under her arm. “No,”
she said. I kept my arm where it was. “Why not?”

“A Farewell to Arms” By Ernest Hemingway 12

“No.” “Yes,” I said. “Please.” I leaned forward in the dark to kiss her and there was a
sharp stinging flash. She had slapped my face hard. Her hand had hit my nose and
eyes, and tears came in my eyes from the reflex. “I’m so sorry,” she said. I felt I had
a certain advantage. “You were quite right.” “I’m dreadfully sorry,” she said. “I just
couldn’t stand the nurse’s-eveningoff aspect of it. I didn’t mean to hurt you. I did hurt
you, didn’t I?” She was looking at me in the dark. I was angry and yet certain, seeing
it all ahead like the moves in a chess game. “You did exactly right,” I said. “I don’t
mind at all.” “Poor man.” “You see I’ve been leading a sort of a funny life. And I never
even talk English. And then you are so very beautiful.” I looked at her. “You don’t
need to say a lot of nonsense. I said I was sorry. We do get along.” “Yes,” I said.
“And we have gotten away from the war.” She laughed. It was the first time I had
ever heard her laugh. I watched her face. “You are sweet,” she said. “No, I’m not.”
“Yes. You are a dear. I’d be glad to kiss you if you don’t mind.” I looked in her eyes
and put my arm around her as I had before and kissed her. I kissed her hard and
held her tight and tried to open her lips; they were closed tight. I was still angry and
as I held her suddenly she shivered. I held her close against me and could feel her
heart beating and her lips opened and her head went back against my hand and
then she was crying on my shoulder. “Oh, darling,” she said. “You will be good to
me, won’t you?” What the hell, I thought. I stroked her hair and patted her shoulder.
She was crying. “You will, won’t you?” She looked up at me. “Because we’re going to
have a strange life.” After a while I walked with her to the door of the villa and she
went in and I walked home. Back at the villa I went upstairs to the room. Rinaldi was
lying on his bed. He looked at me. “So you make progress with Miss Barkley?” “We
are friends.” “You have that pleasant air of a dog in heat.” I did not understand the
word. “Of a what?” He explained. “You,” I said, “have that pleasant air of a dog
who—” “Stop it,” he said. “In a little while we would say insulting things.” He laughed.
“Good-night,” I said. “Good-night, little puppy.” I knocked over his candle with the
pillow and got into bed in the dark. Rinaldi picked up the candle, lit it and went on
reading.
6
I was away for two days at the posts. When I got home it was too late and I did not
see Miss Barkley until the next evening. She was not in the garden and I had to wait
in the office of the hospital until she came down. There were many marble busts on
painted wooden pillars along the walls of the room they used for an office. The hall
too, that the office opened on, was lined with them. They had the complete marble
quality of all looking alike. Sculpture had always seemed a dull business—still,
bronzes looked like something. But marble busts all looked like a cemetery. There
was one fine cemetery though—the one at Pisa. Genoa was the place to see the
bad marbles. This
“A Farewell to Arms” By Ernest Hemingway 13
had been the villa of a very wealthy German and the busts must have cost him
plenty. I wondered who had done them and how much he got. I tried to make out
whether they were members of the family or what; but they were all uniformly
classical. You could not tell anything about them. I sat on a chair and held my cap.
We were supposed to wear steel helmets even in Gorizia but they were
uncomfortable and too bloody theatrical in a town where the civilian inhabitants had
not been evacuated. I wore one when we went up to the posts and carried an
English gas mask. We were just beginning to get some of them. They were a real
mask. Also we were required to wear an automatic pistol; even doctors and sanitary
officers. I felt it against the back of the chair. You were liable to arrest if you did not
have one worn in plain sight. Rinaldi carried a holster stuffed with toilet paper. I wore
a real one and felt like a gunman until I practised firing it. It was an Astra 7.65 caliber
with a short barrel and it jumped so sharply when you let it off that there was no
question of hitting anything. I practised with it, holding below the target and trying to
master the jerk of the ridiculous short barrel until I could hit within a yard of where I
aimed at twenty paces and then the ridiculousness of carrying a pistol at all came
over me and I soon forgot it and carried it flopping against the small of my back with
no feeling at all except a vague sort of shame when I met English-speaking people. I
sat now in the chair and an orderly of some sort looked at me disapprovingly from
behind a desk while I looked at the marble floor, the pillars with the marble busts,
and the frescoes on the wall and waited for Miss Barkley. The frescoes were not
bad. Any frescoes were good when they started to peel and flake off. I saw
Catherine Barkley coming down the hall, and stood up. She did not seem tall walking
toward me but she looked very lovely. “Good-evening, Mr. Henry,” she said. “How do
you do?” I said. The orderly was listening behind the desk. “Shall we sit here or go
out in the garden?” “Let’s go out. It’s much cooler.” I walked behind her out into the
garden, the orderly looking after us. When we were out on the gravel drive she said,
“Where have you been?” “I’ve been out on post.” “You couldn’t have sent me a
note?” “No,” I said. “Not very well. I thought I was coming back.” “You ought to have
let me know, darling.” We were off the driveway, walking under the trees. I took her
hands, then stopped and kissed her. “Isn’t there anywhere we can go?” “No,” she
said. “We have to just walk here. You’ve been away a long time.” “This is the third
day. But I’m back now.” She looked at me, “And you do love me?” “Yes.” “You did
say you loved me, didn’t you?” “Yes,” I lied. “I love you.” I had not said it before. “And
you call me Catherine?” “Catherine.” We walked on a way and were stopped under a
tree. “Say, ‘I’ve come back to Catherine in the night.” “I’ve come back to Catherine in
the night.” “Oh, darling, you have come back, haven’t you?” “Yes.” “I love you so and
it’s been awful. You won’t go away?” “No. I’ll always come back.” “Oh, I love you so.
Please put your hand there again.” “It’s not been away.” I turned her so I could see
her face when I kissed her and I saw that her eyes were shut. I kissed both her shut
eyes. I thought she was probably a little

“A Farewell to Arms” By Ernest Hemingway 14

crazy. It was all right if she was. I did not care what I was getting into. This was
better than going every evening to the house for officers where the girls climbed all
over you and put your cap on backward as a sign of affection between their trips
upstairs with brother officers. I knew I did not love Catherine Barkley nor had any
idea of loving her. This was a game, like bridge, in which you said things instead of
playing cards. Like bridge you had to pretend you were playing for money or playing
for some stakes. Nobody had mentioned what the stakes were. It was all right with
me. “I wish there was some place we could go,” I said. I was experiencing the
masculine difficulty of making love very long standing up. “There isn’t any place,” she
said. She came back from wherever she had been. “We might sit there just for a little
while.” We sat on the flat stone bench and I held Catherine Barkley’s hand. She
would not let me put my arm around her. “Are you very tired?” she asked. “No.” She
looked down at the grass. “This is a rotten game we play, isn’t it?” “What game?”
“Don’t be dull.” “I’m not, on purpose.” “You’re a nice boy,” she said. “And you play it
as well as you know how. But it’s a rotten game.” “Do you always know what people
think?” “Not always. But I do with you. You don’t have to pretend you love me. That’s
over for the evening. Is there anything you’d like to talk about?” “But I do love you.”
“Please let’s not lie when we don’t have to. I had a very fine little show and I’m all
right now. You see I’m not mad and I’m not gone off. It’s only a little sometimes.” I
pressed her hand, “Dear Catherine.” “It sounds very funny now—Catherine. You
don’t pronounce it very much alike. But you’re very nice. You’re a very good boy.”
“That’s what the priest said.” “Yes, you’re very good. And you will come and see
me?” “Of course.” “And you don’t have to say you love me. That’s all over for a
while.” She stood up and put out her hand. “Good-night.” I wanted to kiss her. “No,”
she said. “I’m awfully tired.” “Kiss me, though,” I said. “I’m awfully tired, darling.”
“Kiss me.” “Do you want to very much?” “Yes.” We kissed and she broke away
suddenly. “No. Good-night, please, darling.” We walked to the door and I saw her go
in and down the hall. I liked to watch her move. She went on down the hall. I went on
home. It was a hot night and there was a good deal going on up in the mountains. I
watched the flashes on San Gabriele. I stopped in front of the Villa Rossa. The
shutters were up but it was still going on inside. Somebody was singing. I went on
home. Rinaldi came in while I was undressing. “Ah, ha!” he said. “It does not go so
well. Baby is puzzled.” “Where have you been?” “At the Villa Rossa. It was very
edifying, baby. We all sang. Where have you been?” “Calling on the British.” “Thank
God I did not become involved with the British.”

“A Farewell to Arms” By Ernest Hemingway 15

7
I came back the next afternoon from our first mountain post and stopped the car at
the smistimento where the wounded and sick were sorted by their papers and the
papers marked for the different hospitals. I had been driving and I sat in the car and
the driver took the papers in. It was a hot day and the sky was very bright and blue
and the road was white and dusty. I sat in the high seat of the Fiat and thought about
nothing. A regiment went by in the road and I watched them pass. The men were hot
and sweating. Some wore their steel helmets but most of them carried them slung
from their packs. Most of the helmets were too big and came down almost over the
ears of the men who wore them. The officers all wore helmets; better-fitting helmets.
It was half of the brigata Basilicata. I identified them by their red and white striped
collar mark. There were stragglers going by long after the regiment had passed—
men who could not keep up with their platoons. They were sweaty, dusty and tired.
Some looked pretty bad. A soldier came along after the last of the stragglers. He
was walking with a limp. He stopped and sat down beside the road. I got down and
went over. “What’s the matter?” He looked at me, then stood up. “I’m going on.”
“What’s the trouble?” “— the war.” “What’s wrong with your leg?” “It’s not my leg. I
got a rupture.” “Why don’t you ride with the transport?” I asked. “Why don’t you go to
the hospital?” “They won’t let me. The lieutenant said I slipped the truss on purpose.”
“Let me feel it.” “It’s way out.” “Which side is it on?” “Here.” I felt it. “Cough,” I said.
“I’m afraid it will make it bigger. It’s twice as big as it was this morning.” “Sit down,” I
said. “As soon as I get the papers on these wounded I’ll take you along the road and
drop you with your medical officers.” “He’ll say I did it on purpose.” “They can’t do
anything,” I said. “It’s not a wound. You’ve had it before, haven’t you?” “But I lost the
truss.” “They’ll send you to a hospital.” “Can’t I stay here, Tenente?” “No, I haven’t
any papers for you.” The driver came out of the door with the papers for the
wounded in the car. “Four for 105. Two for 132,” he said. They were hospitals
beyond the river. “You drive,” I said. I helped the soldier with the rupture up on the
seat with us. “You speak English?” he asked. “Sure.” “How you like this goddam
war?” “Rotten.” “I say it’s rotten. Jesus Christ, I say it’s rotten.” “Were you in the
States?” “Sure. In Pittsburgh. I knew you was an American.” “Don’t I talk Italian good
enough?” “I knew you was an American all right.” “Another American,” said the driver
in Italian looking at the hernia man. “Listen, lootenant. Do you have to take me to
that regiment?” “Yes.”
“A Farewell to Arms” By Ernest Hemingway 16
“Because the captain doctor knew I had this rupture. I threw away the goddam truss
so it would get bad and I wouldn’t have to go to the line again.” “I see.” “Couldn’t you
take me no place else?” “If it was closer to the front I could take you to a first medical
post. But back here you’ve got to have papers.” “If I go back they’ll make me get
operated on and then they’ll put me in the line all the time.” I thought it over. “You
wouldn’t want to go in the line all the time, would you?” he asked. “No.” “Jesus
Christ, ain’t this a goddam war?” “Listen,” I said. “You get out and fall down by the
road and get a bump on your head and I’ll pick you up on our way back and take you
to a hospital. We’ll stop by the road here, Aldo.” We stopped at the side of the road. I
helped him down. “I’ll be right here, lieutenant,” he said. “So long,” I said. We went
on and passed the regiment about a mile ahead, then crossed the river, cloudy with
snow-water and running fast through the spiles of the bridge, to ride along the road
across the plain and deliver the wounded at the two hospitals. I drove coming back
and went fast with the empty car to find the man from Pittsburgh. First we passed the
regiment, hotter and slower than ever: then the stragglers. Then we saw a horse
ambulance stopped by the road. Two men were lifting the hernia man to put him in.
They had come back for him. He shook his head at me. His helmet was off and his
forehead was bleeding below the hair line. His nose was skinned and there was dust
on the bloody patch and dust in his hair. “Look at the bump, lieutenant!” he shouted.
“Nothing to do. They come back for me.” When I got back to the villa it was five
o’clock and I went out where we washed the cars, to take a shower. Then I made out
my report in my room, sitting in my trousers and an undershirt in front of the open
window. In two days the offensive was to start and I would go with the cars to Plava.
It was a long time since I had written to the States and I knew I should write but I had
let it go so long that it was almost impossible to write now. There was nothing to
write about. I sent a couple of army Zona di Guerra post-cards, crossing out
everything except, I am well. That should handle them. Those post-cards would be
very fine in America; strange and mysterious. This was a strange and mysterious
war zone but I supposed it was quite well run and grim compared to other wars with
the Austrians. The Austrian army was created to give Napoleon victories; any
Napoleon. I wished we had a Napoleon, but instead we had Ii Generale Cadorna, fat
and prosperous and Vittorio Emmanuele, the tiny man with the long thin neck and
the goat beard. Over on the right they had the Duke of Aosta. Maybe he was too
good-looking to be a. great general but he looked like a man. Lots of them would
have liked him to be king. He looked like a king. He was the King’s uncle and
commanded the third army. We were in the second army. There were some British
batteries up with the third army. I had met two gunners from that lot, in Milan. They
were very nice and we had a big evening. They were big and shy and embarrassed
and very appreciative together of anything that happened. I wish that I was with the
British. It would have been much simpler. Still I would probably have been killed. Not
in this ambulance business. Yes, even in the ambulance business. British
ambulance drivers were killed sometimes. Well, I knew I would not be killed. Not in
this war. It did not have anything to do with me. It seemed no more dangerous to me
myself than war in the movies. I wished to God it was over though. Maybe it would
finish this summer. Maybe the Austrians would crack. They had always cracked in
other wars. What was the matter with this war? Everybody said the French were
through. Rinaldi said that the French had mutinied and troops marched on Paris. I
asked him what happened and he said, “Oh, they stopped them.” I wanted to go to
Austria without war. I wanted to go to the Black Forest. I wanted to go to the Hartz
Mountains.

“A Farewell to Arms” By Ernest Hemingway 17

Where were the Hartz Mountains anyway? They were fighting in the Carpathians. I
did not want to go there anyway. It might be good though. I could go to Spain if there
was no war. The sun was going down and the day was cooling off. After supper I
would go and see Catherine Barkley. I wish she were here now. I wished I were in
Milan with her. I would like to eat at the Cova and then walk down the Via Manzoni in
the hot evening and cross over and turn off along the canal and go to the hotel with
Catherine Barkley. Maybe she would. Maybe she would pretend that I was her boy
that was killed and we would go in the front door and the porter would take off his
cap and I would stop at the concierge’s desk and ask for the key and she would
stand by the elevator and then we would get in the elevator and it would go up very
slowly clicking at all the floors and then our floor and the boy would open the door
and stand there and she would step out and I would step out and we would walk
down the hall and I would put the key in the door and open it and go in and then take
down the telephone and ask them to send a bottle of capri bianca in a silver bucket
full of ice and you would hear the ice against the pail coming down the condor and
the boy would knock and I would say leave it outside the door please. Because we
would not wear any clothes because it was so hot and the window open and the
swallows flying over the roofs of the houses and when it was dark afterward and you
went to the window very small bats hunting over the houses and close down over the
trees and we would drink the capri and the door locked and it hot and only a sheet
and the whole night and we would both love each other all night in the hot night in
Milan. That was how it ought to be. I would eat quickly and go and see Catherine
Barkley. They talked too much at the mess and I drank wine because tonight we
were not all brothers unless I drank a little and talked with the priest about
Archbishop Ireland who was, it seemed, a noble man and with whose injustice, the
injustices he had received and in which I participated as an American, and of which I
had never heard, I feigned acquaintance. It would have been impolite not to have
known something of them when I had listened to such a splendid explanation of their
causes which were, after all, it seemed, misunderstandings. I thought he had a fine
name and he came from Minnesota which made a lovely name: Ireland of
Minnesota, Ireland of Wisconsin, Ireland of Michigan. What made it pretty was that it
sounded like Island. No that wasn’t it. There was more to it than that. Yes, father.
That is true, father. Perhaps, father. No, father. Well, maybe yes, father. You know
more about it than I do, father. The priest was good but dull. The officers were not
good but dull. The King was good but dull. The wine was bad but not dull. It took the
enamel off your teeth and left it on the roof of your mouth. “And the priest was locked
up,” Rocca said, “because they found the three per cent bonds on his person. It was
in France of course. Here they would never have arrested him. He denied all
knowledge of the five per cent bonds. This took place at Béziers. I was there and
reading of it in the paper, went to the jail and asked to see the priest. It was quite
evident he had stolen the bonds.” “I don’t believe a word of this,” Rinaldi said. “Just
as you like,” Rocca said. “But I am telling it for our priest here. It is very informative.
He is a priest; he will appreciate it.” The priest smiled. “Go on,” he said. “I am
listening.” “Of course some of the bonds were not accounted for but the priest had all
of the three per cent bonds and several local obligations, I forget exactly what they
were. So I went to the jail, now this is the point of the story, and I stood outside his
cell and I said as though I were going to confession, ‘Bless me, father, for you have
sinned.” There was great laughter from everybody. “And what did he say?” asked the
priest. Rocca ignored this and went on to explain the joke to me. “You see the point,
don’t you?” It seemed it was a very funny joke if you understood it properly. They
poured me more wine and I told the story about the English private soldier who was
placed under the shower bath. Then the major told the story of the eleven Czechoslovaks and the Hungarian corporal. After some more wine I told the story of the
jockey who found the penny. The major said there was an Italian story

“A Farewell to Arms” By Ernest Hemingway 18

something like that about the duchess who could not sleep at night. At this point the
priest left and I told the story about the travelling salesman who arrived at five
o’clock in the morning at Marseilles when the mistral was blowing. The major said he
had heard a report that I could drink. I denied this. He said it was true and by the
corpse of Bacchus we would test whether it was true or not. Not Bacchus, I said. Not
Baëchus. Yes, Bacchus, he said. I should drink cup for cup and glass for glass with
Bassi, Fillipo Vincenza. Bassi said no that was no test because he had already drunk
twice as much as I. I said that was a foul lie and, Bacchus or no Bacchus, Fillipo
Vincenza Bassi or Bassi Fillippo Vicenza had never touched a drop all evening and
what was his name anyway? He said was my name Frederico Enrico or Enrico
Federico? I said let the best man win, Bacchus barred, and the major started us with
red wine in mugs. Half-way through the wine I did not want any more. I remembered
where I was going. “Bassi wins,” I said. “He’s a better man than I am. I have to go.”
“He does really,” said Rinaldi. “He has a rendezvous. I know all about it.” “I have to
go.” “Another night,” said Bassi. “Another night when you feel stronger.” He slapped
me on the shoulder. There were lighted candles on the table. All the officers were
very happy. “Good-night, gentlemen,” I said. Rinaldi went out with me. We stood
outside the door on the patch and he said, “You better not go up there drunk.” “I’m
not drunk, Rinin. Really.” “You’d better chew some coffee.” “Nonsense.” “I’ll get
some, baby. You walk up and down.” He came back with a handful of roasted coffee
beans. “Chew those, baby, and God be with you.” “Bacchus,” I said. “I’ll walk down
with you.” “I’m perfectly all right.” We walked along together through the town and I
chewed the coffee. At the gate of the driveway that led up to the British villa, Rinaldi
said good-night. “Good-night,” I said. “Why don’t you come in?” He shook his head.
“No,” he said. “I like the simpler pleasures.” “Thank you for the coffee beans.”
“Nothing, baby. Nothing.” J started down the driveway. The outlines of the cypresses
that lined it were sharp and clear. I looked back and saw Rinaldi standing watching
me and waved to him. I sat in the reception hail of the villa, waiting for Catherine
Barkley to come down. Some one was coming down the hallway. I stood up, but it
was not Catherine. It was Miss Ferguson. “Hello,” she said. “Catherine asked me to
tell you she was sorry she couldn’t see you this evening.” “I’m so sorry. I hope she’s
not ill.” “She’s not awfully well.” “Will you tell her how sorry I am?” “Yes, I will.” “Do
you think it would be any good to try and see her tomorrow?” “Yes, I do.” “Thank you
very much,” I said. “Good-night.” I went out the door and suddenly I felt lonely and
empty. I had treated seeing Catherine very lightly, I had gotten somewhat drunk and
had nearly forgotten to come but when I could not see her there I was feeling lonely
and hollow.

“A Farewell to Arms” By Ernest Hemingway 19

8
The next afternoon we heard there was to be an attack up the river that night and
that we were to take four cars there. Nobody knew anything about it although they all
spoke with great positiveness and strategical knowledge. I was riding in the first car
and as we passed the entry to the British hospital I told the driver to stop. The other
cars pulled up. I got out and told the driver to go on and that if we had not caught up
to them at the junction of the road to Cormons to wait there. I hurried up the
driveway and inside the reception hall I asked for Miss Barkley. “She’s on duty.”
“Could I see her just for a moment?” They sent an orderly to see and she came back
with him. “I stopped to ask if you were better. They told me you were on duty, so I
asked to see you.” “I’m quite well,” she said, “I think the heat knocked me over
yesterday.” “I have to go.” “I’ll just step out the door a minute.” “And you’re all right?”
I asked outside. “Yes, darling. Are you coming to-night?” “No. I’m leaving now for a
show up above Plava.” “A show?” “I don’t think it’s anything.” “And you’ll be back?”
“To-morrow.” She was unclasping something from her neck. She put it in my hand.
“It’s a Saint Anthony,” she said. “And come to-morrow night.” “You’re not a Catholic,
are you?” “No. But they say a Saint Anthony’s very useful.” “I’ll take care of him for
you. Good-by.” “No,” she said, “not good-by.” “All right.” “Be a good boy and be
careful. No, you can’t kiss me here. You can’t.” “All right.” I looked back and saw her
standing on the steps. She waved and I kissed my hand and held it out. She waved
again and then I was out of the driveway and climbing up into the seat of the
ambulance and we started. The Saint Anthony was in a little white metal capsule. I
opened the capsule and spilled him out into my hand. “Saint Anthony?” asked the
driver. “Yes.” “I have one.” His right hand left the wheel and opened a button on his
tunic and pulled it out from under his shirt. “See?” I put my Saint Anthony back in the
capsule, spilled the thin gold chain together and put it all in my breast pocket. “You
don’t wear him?” “No.” “It’s better to wear him. That’s what it’s for.” “All right,” I said. I
undid the clasp of the gold chain and put it around my neck and clasped it. The saint
hung down on the Outside of my uniform and I undid the throat of my tunic,
unbuttoned the shirt collar and dropped him in under the shirt. I felt him in his metal
box against my chest while we drove. Then I forgot about him. After I was wounded I
never found him. Some one probably got it at one of the dressing stations. We drove
fast when we were over the bridge and soon we saw the dust of the other cars
ahead down the road. The road curved and we saw the three cars looking quite
small, the dust rising from the wheels and going off through the trees. We caught
them
“A Farewell to Arms” By Ernest Hemingway 20
and passed them and turned off on a road that climbed up into the hills. Driving in
convoy is not unpleasant if you are the first car and I settled back in the seat and
watched the country. We were in the foothills on the near side of the river and as the
road mounted there were the high mountains off to the north with snow still on the
tops. I looked back and saw the three cars all climbing, spaced by the interval of
their dust. We passed a long column of loaded mules, the drivers walking along
beside the mules wearing red fezzes. They were bersaglieri. Beyond the mule train
the road was empty and we climbed through the hills and then went down over the
shoulder of a long hill into a river-valley. There were trees along both sides of the
road and through the right line of trees I saw the river, the water clear, fast and
shallow. The river was low and there were stretches of sand and pebbles with a
narrow channel of water and sometimes the water spread like a sheen over the
pebbly bed. Close to the bank I saw deep pools, the water blue like the sky. I saw
arched stone bridges over the river where tracks turned off from the road and we
passed stone farmhouses with pear trees candelabraed against their south walls and
low stone walls in the fields. The road went up the valley a long way and then we
turned off and commenced to climb into the hills again. The road climbed steeply
going up and back and forth through chestnut woods to level finally along a ridge. I
could look down through the woods and see, far below, with the sun on it, the line of
the river that separated the two armies. We went along the rough new military road
that followed the crest of the ridge and I looked to the north at the two ranges of
mountains, green and dark to the snow-line and then white and lovely in the sun.
Then, as the road mounted along the ridge, I saw a third range of mountains, higher
snow mountains, that looked chalky white and furrowed, with strange planes, and
then there were mountains far off beyond all these that you could hardly tell if you
really saw. Those were all the Austrians’ mountains and we had nothing like them.
Ahead there was a rounded turn-off in the road to the right and looking down I could
see the road dropping through the trees. There were troops on this road and motor
trucks and mules with mountain guns and as we went down, keeping to the side, I
could see the river far down below, the line of ties and rails running along it, the old
bridge where the railway crossed to the other side and across, under a hill beyond
the river, the broken houses of the little town that was to be taken. It was nearly dark
when we came down and turned onto the main road that ran beside the river.
9
The road was crowded and there were screens of corn-stalk and straw matting on
both sides and matting over the top so that it was like the entrance at a circus or a
native village. We drove slowly in this matting-covered tunnel and came out onto a
bare cleared space where the railway station had been. The road here was below
the level of the river bank and all along the side of the sunken road there were holes
dug in the bank with infantry in them. The sun was going down and looking up along
the bank as we drove I saw the Austrian observation balloons above the hills on the
other side dark against the sunset. We parked the cars beyond a brickyard. The
ovens and some deep holes had been equipped as dressing stations. There were
three doctors that I knew. I talked with the major and learned that when it should
start and our cars should be loaded we would drive them back along the screened
road and up to the main road along the ridge where there would be a post and other
cars to clear them. He hoped the road would not jam. It was a one-road show. The
road was screened because it was in sight of the Austrians across the river. Here at
the brickyard we were sheltered from rifle or machine-gun fire by the river bank.
There was one smashed bridge across the river. They were going to put over
another bridge when the bombardment started and some troops were to cross at the
shallows up above at the bend of the river. The major was a little man with upturned
mustaches. He had been in the war in Libya and wore two
“A Farewell to Arms” By Ernest Hemingway 21
woundstripes. He said that if the thing went well he would see that I was decorated. I
said I hoped it would go well but that he was too kind. I asked him if there was a big
dugout where the drivers could stay and he sent a soldier to show me. I went with
him and found the dugout, which was very good. The drivers were pleased with it
and I left them there. The major asked me to have a drink with him and two other
officers. We drank rum and it was very friendly. Outside it was getting dark. I asked
what time the attack was to he and they said as soon as it was dark. I went back to
the drivers. They were sitting in the dugout talking and when I came in they stopped.
I gave them each a package of cigarettes, Macedonias, loosely packed cigarettes
that spilled tobacco and needed to have the ends twisted before you smoked them.
Manera lit his lighter and passed it around. The lighter was shaped like a Fiat
radiator. I told them what I had heard. “Why didn’t we see the post when we came
down?” Passini asked. “It was just beyond where we turned off.” “That road will be a
dirty mess,” Manera said. “They’ll shell the —— out of us.” “Probably.” “What about
eating, lieutenant? We won’t get a chance to eat after this thing starts.” “I’ll go and
see now,” I said. “You want us to stay here or can we look around?” “Better stay
here.” I went back to the major’s dugout and he said the field kitchen would be along
and the drivers could come and get their stew. He would loan them mess tins if they
did not have them. I said I thought they had them. I went back and told the drivers I
would get them as soon as the food came. Manera said he hoped it would come
before the bombardment started. They were silent until I went out. They were all
mechanics and hated the war. I went out to look at the cars and see what was going
on and then came back and sat down in the dugout with the four drivers. We sat on
the ground with our backs against the wall and smoked. Outside it was nearly dark.
The earth of the dugout was warm and dry and I let my shoulders back against the
wall, sitting on the small of my back, and relaxed. “Who goes to the attack?” asked
Gavuzzi. “Bersaglieri.” “All bersaglieri?” “I think so.” “There aren’t enough troops here
for a real attack.” “It is probably to draw attention from where the real attack will be.”
“Do the men know that who attack?” “I don’t think so.” “Of course they don’t,” Manera
said. “They wouldn’t attack if they did.” “Yes, they would,” Passini said. “Bersaglieri
are fools.” “They are brave and have good discipline,” I said. “They are big through
the chest by measurement, and healthy. But they are still fools.” “The granatieri are
tall,” Manera said. This was a joke. They all laughed. “Were you there, Tenente,
when they wouldn’t attack and they shot every tenth man?” “No.” “It is true. They
lined them up afterward and took every tenth man. Carabinieri shot them.”
“Carabinieri,” said Passini and spat on the floor. “But those grenadiers; all over six
feet. They wouldn’t attack.” “If everybody would not attack the war would be over,”
Manera said. “It wasn’t that way with the granatieri. They were afraid. The officers all
came from such good families.” “Some of the officers went alone.”

“A Farewell to Arms” By Ernest Hemingway 22

“A sergeant shot two officers who would not get out.” “Some troops went out.”
“Those that went out were not lined up when they took the tenth men.” “One of those
shot by the carabinieri is from my town,” Passini said. “He was a big smart tall boy to
be in the granatieri. Always in Rome. Always with the girls. Always with the
carabinieri.” He laughed. “Now they have a guard outside his house with a bayonet
and nobody can come to see his mother and father and sisters and his father loses
his civil rights and cannot even vote. They are all without law to protect them.
Anybody can take their property.” “If it wasn’t that that happens to their families
nobody would go to the attack.” “Yes. Alpini would. These V. E. soldiers would.
Some bersaglieri.” “Bersaglieri have run too. Now they try to forget it.” “You should
not let us talk this way, Tenente. Evviva l’esercito,” Passini said sarcastically. “I know
how you talk,” I said. “But as long as you drive the cars and behave—” “—and don’t
talk so other officers can hear,” Manera finished. “I believe we should get the war
over,” I said. “It would not finish it if one side stopped fighting. It would only be worse
if we stopped fighting.” “It could not be worse,” Passini said respectfully. “There is
nothing worse than war.” “Defeat is worse.” “I do not believe it,” Passini said still
respectfully. “What is defeat? You go home.” “They come after you. They take your
home. They take your sisters.” “I don’t believe it,” Passini said. “They can’t do that to
everybody. Let everybody defend his home. Let them keep their sisters in the
house.” “They hang you. They come and make you be a soldier again. Not in the
auto-ambulance, in the infantry.” “They can’t hang every one.” “An outside nation
can’t make you be a soldier,” Manera said. “At the first battle you all run.” “Like the
Tchecos.” “I think you do not know anything about being conquered and so you think
it is not bad.” “Tenente,” Passini said. “We understand you let us talk. Listen. There
is nothing as bad as war. We in the auto-ambulance cannot even realize at all how
bad it is. When people realize how bad it is they cannot do anything to stop it
because they go crazy. There are some people who never realize. There are people
who are afraid of their officers. It is with them the war is made.” “I know it is bad but
we must finish it.” “It doesn’t finish. There is no finish to a war.” “Yes there is.”
Passini shook his head. “War is not won by victory. What if we take San Gabriele?
What if we take the Carso and Monfalcone and Trieste? Where are we then? Did
you see all the far mountains to-day? Do you think we could take all them too? Only
if the Austrians stop fighting. One side must stop fighting. Why don’t we stop
fighting? If they come down into Italy they will get tired and go away. They have their
own country. But no, instead there is a war.” “You’re an orator.” “We think. We read.
We are not peasants. We are mechanics. But even the peasants know better than to
believe in a war. Everybody hates this war.” “There is a class that controls a country
that is stupid and does not realize anything and never can. That is why we have this
war.” “Also they make money out of it.” “Most of them don’t,” said Passini. “They are
too stupid. They do it for nothing. For stupidity.” “We must shut up,” said Manera.
“We talk too much even for the Tenente.”

“A Farewell to Arms” By Ernest Hemingway 23

“He likes it,” said Passini. “We will convert him.” “But now we will shut up,” Manera
said. “Do we eat yet, Tenente?” Gavuzzi asked. “I will go and see,” I said. Gordini
stood up and went outside with me. “Is there anything I can do, Tenente? Can I help
in any way?” He was the quietest one of the four. “Come with me if you want,” I said,
“and we’ll see.” It was dark outside and the long light from the search-lights was
moving over the mountains. There were big search-lights on that front mounted on
camions that you passed sometimes on the roads at night, close behind the lines,
the camion stopped a little off the road, an officer directing the light and the crew
scared. We crossed the brickyard, and stopped at the main dressing station. There
was a little shelter of green branches outside over the entrance and in the dark the
night wind rustled the leaves dried by the sun. Inside there was a light. The major
was at the telephone sitting on a box. One of the medical captains said the attack
had been put forward an hour. He offered me a glass of cognac. I looked at the
board tables, the instruments shining in the light, the basins and the stoppered
bottles. Gordini stood behind me. The major got up from the telephone. “It starts
now,” he said. “It has been put back again.” I looked outside, it was dark and the
Austrian search-lights were moving on the mountains behind us. It was quiet for a
moment still, then from all the guns behind us the bombardment started. “Savoia,”
said the major. “About the soup, major,” I said. He did not hear me. I repeated it. “It
hasn’t come up.” A big shell came in and burst outside in the brickyard. Another
burst and in the noise you could hear the smaller noise of the brick and dirt raining
down. “What is there to eat?” “We have a little pasta asciutta,” the major said. “I’ll
take what you can give me.” The major spoke to an orderly who went out of sight in
the back and came back with a metal basin of cold cooked macaroni. I handed it to
Gordini. “Have you any cheese?” The major spoke grudgingly to the orderly who
ducked back into the hole again and came out with a quarter of a white cheese.
“Thank you very much,” I said. “You’d better not go out.” Outside something was set
down beside the entrance. One of the two men who had carried it looked in. “Bring
him in,” said the major. “What’s the matter with you? Do you want us to come
outside and get him?” The two stretcher-bearers picked up the man under the arms
and by the legs and brought him in. “Slit the tunic,” the major said. He held a forceps
with some gauze in the end. The two captains took off their coats. “Get out of here,”
the major said to the two stretcher-bearers. “Come on,” I said to Gordini. “You better
wait until the shelling is over,” the major said over his shoulder. “They want to eat,” I
said. “As you wish.” Outside we ran across the brickyard. A shell burst short near the
river bank. Then there was one that we did not hear coming until the sudden rush.
We both went flat and with the flash and bump of the burst and the smell heard the
singing off of the fragments and the rattle of falling brick. Gordini got up and ran for
the dugout. I was after him, holding the cheese, its smooth surface covered with
brick dust. Inside the dugout were the three drivers sitting against the wall, smoking.

“A Farewell to Arms” By Ernest Hemingway 24

“Here, you patriots,” I said. “How are the cars?” Manera asked. “All right.” “Did they
scare you, Tenente?” “You’re damned right,” I said. I took out my knife, opened it,
wiped off the blade and pared off the dirty outside surface of the cheese. Gavuzzi
handed me the basin of macaroni. “Start in to eat, Tenente.” “No,” I said. “Put it on
the floor. We’ll all eat.” “There are no forks.” “What the hell,” I said in English. I cut
the cheese into pieces and laid them on the macaroni. “Sit down to it,” I said. They
sat down and waited. I put thumb and fingers into the macaroni and lifted. A mass
loosened. “Lift it high, Tenente.” I lifted it to arm’s length and the strands cleared. I
lowered it into the mouth, sucked and snapped in the ends, and chewed, then took a
bite of cheese, chewed, and then a drink of the wine. It tasted of rusty metal. I
handed the canteen back to Passini. “It’s rotten,” he said. “It’s been in there too long.
I had it in the car.” They were all eating, holding their chins close over the basin,
tipping their heads back, sucking in the ends. I took another mouthful and some
cheese and a rinse of wine. Something landed outside that shook the earth. “Four
hundred twenty or minnenwerfer,” Gavuzzi said. “There aren’t any four hundred
twenties in the mountains,” I said. “They have big Skoda guns. I’ve seen the holes.”
“Three hundred fives.” We went on eating. There was a cough, a noise like a railway
engine starting and then an explosion that shook the earth again. “This isn’t a deep
dugout,” Passini said. “That was a big trench mortar.” “Yes, sir.” I ate the end of my
piece of cheese and took a swallow of wine. Through the other noise I heard a
cough, then came the chuh-chuhchuh-chuh—then there was a flash, as when a
blast-furnace door is swung open, and a roar that started white and went red and on
and on in a rushing wind. I tried to breathe but my breath would not come and I felt
myself rush bodily out of myself and out and out and out and all the time bodily in the
wind. I went out swiftly, all of myself, and I knew I was dead and that it had all been a
mistake to think you just died. Then I floated, and instead of going on I felt myself
slide back. I breathed and I was back. The ground was torn up and in front of my
head there was a splintered beam of wood. In the jolt of my head I heard somebody
crying. I thought somebody was screaming. I tried to move but I could not move. I
heard the machine-guns and rifles firing across the river and all along the river.
There was a great splashing and I saw the star-shells go up and burst and float
whitely and rockets going up and heard the bombs, all this in a moment, and then I
heard close to me some one saying “Mama Mia! Oh, mama Mia!” I pulled and
twisted and got my legs loose finally and turned around and touched him. It was
Passini and when I touched him he screamed. His legs were toward me and I saw in
the dark and the light that they were both smashed above the knee. One leg was
gone and the other was held by tendons and part of the trouser and the stump
twitched and jerked as though it were not connected. He bit his arm and moaned,
“Oh mama mia, mama Mia,” then, “Dio te salve, Maria. Dio te salve, Maria. Oh Jesus
shoot me Christ shoot me mama mia mama Mia oh purest lovely Mary shoot me.
Stop it. Stop it. Stop it. Oh Jesus lovely Mary stop it. Oh oh oh oh,” then choking,
“Mama mama mia.” Then he was quiet, biting his arm, the stump of his leg twitching.
“Porta feriti!” I shouted holding my hands cupped. “Porta feriti!” I tried to get closer to

“A Farewell to Arms” By Ernest Hemingway 25

Passini to try to put a tourniquet on the legs but I could not move. I tried again and
my legs moved a little. I could pull backward along with my arms and elbows. Passini
was quiet now. I sat beside him, undid my tunic and tried to rip the tail of my shirt. It
would not rip and I bit the edge of the cloth to start it. Then I thought of his puttees. I
had on wool stockings but Passini wore puttees. All the drivers wore puttees but
Passini had only one leg. I unwound the puttee and while I was doing it I saw there
was no need to try and make a tourniquet because he was dead already. I made
sure he was dead. There were three others to locate. I sat up straight and as I did so
something inside my head moved like the weights on a doll’s eyes and it hit me
inside in back of my eyeballs. My legs felt warm and wet and my shoes were wet
and warm inside. I knew that I was hit and leaned over and put my hand on my knee.
My knee wasn’t there. My hand went in and my knee was down on my shin. I wiped
my hand on my shirt and another floating light came very slowly down and I looked
at my leg and was very afraid. Oh, God, I said, get me out of here. I knew, however,
that there had been three others. There were four drivers. Passini was dead. That
left three. Some one took hold of me under the arms and somebody else lifted my
legs. “There are three others,” I said. “One is dead.” “It’s Manera. We went for a
stretcher but there wasn’t any. How are you, Tenente?” “Where is Gordini and
Gavuzzi?” “Gordini’s at the post getting bandaged. Gavuzzi has your legs. Hold on to
my neck, Tenente. Are you badly hit?” “In the leg. How is Gordini?” “He’s all right. It
was a big trench mortar shell.” “Passini’s dead.” “Yes. He’s dead.” A shell fell close
and they both dropped to the ground and dropped me. “I’m sorry, Tenente,” said
Manera. “Hang onto my neck.” “If you drop me again.” “It was because we were
scared.” “Are you unwounded?” “We are both wounded a little.” “Can Gordini drive?”
“I don’t think so.” They dropped me once more before we reached the post. “You
sons of bitches,” I said. “I am sorry, Tenente,” Manera said. “We won’t drop you
again.” Outside the post a great many of us lay on the ground in the dark. They
carried wounded in and brought them out. I could see the light come out from the
dressing station when the curtain opened and they brought some one in or out. The
dead were off to one side. The doctors were working with their sleeves up to their
shoulders and were red as butchers. There were not enough stretchers. Some of the
wounded were noisy but most were quiet. The wind blew the leaves in the bower
over the door of the dressing station and the night was getting cold. Stretcherbearers came in all the time, put their stretchers down, unloaded them and went
away. As soon as I got to the dressing station Manera brought a medical sergeant
out and he put bandages on both my legs. He said there was so much dirt blown into
the wound that there had not been much hemorrhage. They would take me as soon
as possible. He went back inside. Gordini could not drive, Manera said. His shoulder
was smashed and his head was hurt. He had not felt bad but now the shoulder had
stiffened. He was sitting up beside one of the brick walls. Manera and Gavuzzi each
went off with a load of wounded. They could drive all right. The British had come with
three ambulances and they had two men on each ambulance. One of their drivers
came over to me, brought by Gordini who looked very white and sick. The Britisher
leaned over. “Are you hit badly?” he asked. He was a tall man and wore steelrimmed spectacles. “In the legs.”

“A Farewell to Arms” By Ernest Hemingway 26

“It’s not serious I hope. Will you have a cigarette?” “Thanks.” “They tell me you’ve
lost two drivers.” “Yes. One killed and the fellow that brought you.” “What rotten luck.
Would you like us to take the cars?” “That’s what I wanted to ask you.” “We’d take
quite good care of them and return them to the villa. 206 aren’t you?” “Yes.” “It’s a
charming place. I’ve seen you about. They tell me you’re an American.” “Yes.” “I’m
English.” “No!” “Yes, English. Did you think I was Italian? There were some Italians
with one of our units.” “It would be fine if you would take the cars,” I said. “We’ll be
most careful of them,” he straightened up. “This chap of yours was very anxious for
me to see you.” He patted Gordini on the shoulder. Gordini winced and smiled. The
Englishman broke into voluble and perfect Italian. “Now everything is arranged. I’ve
seen your Tenente. We will take over the two cars. You won’t worry now.” He broke
off, “I must do something about getting you out of here. I’ll see the medical wallahs.
We’ll take you back with us.” He walked across to the dressing station, stepping
carefully among the wounded. I saw the blanket open, the light came out and he
went in. “He will look after you, Tenente,” Gordini said. “How are you, Franco?” “I am
all right.” He sat down beside me. In a moment the blanket in front of the dressing
station opened and two stretcherbearers came out followed by the tall Englishman.
He brought them over to me. “Here is the American Tenente,” he said in Italian. “I’d
rather wait,” I said. “There are much worse wounded than me. I’m all right.” “Come,
come,” he said. “Don’t be a bloody hero.” Then in Italian: “Lift him very carefully
about the legs. His legs are very painful. He is the legitimate son of President
Wilson.” They picked me up and took me into the dressing room. Inside they were
operating on all the tables. The little major looked at us furious. He recognized me
and waved a forceps. “Ca va bien?” “Ca va.” “I have brought him in,” the tall
Englishman said in Italian. “The only son of the American Ambassador. He can be
here until you are ready to take him. Then I will take him with my first load.” He bent
over me. “I’ll look up their adjutant to do your papers and it will all go much faster.”
He stooped to go under the doorway and went out. The major was unhooking the
forceps now, dropping them in a basin. I followed his hands with my eyes. Now he
was bandaging. Then the stretcher-bearers took the man off the table. “I’ll take the
American Tenente,” one of the captains said. They lifted me onto the table. It was
hard and slippery. There were many strong smells, chemical smells and the sweet
smell of blood. They took off my trousers and the medical captain commenced
dictating to the sergeant-adjutant while he worked, “Multiple superficial wounds of
the left and right thigh and left and right knee and right foot. Profound wounds of
right knee and foot. Lacerations of the scalp (he probed—Does that hurt?—Christ,
yes!) with possible fracture of the skull. Incurred in the line of duty. That’s what
keeps you from being court-martialled for self-inflicted wounds,” he said. “Would you
like a drink of brandy? How did you run into this thing anyway? What were you trying
to do? Commit suicide? Antitetanus please, and mark a cross on both legs. Thank
you. I’ll clean this up a little, wash it out, and put on a dressing. Your blood
coagulates beautifully.” The adjutant, looking up from the paper, “What inflicted the
wounds?”

“A Farewell to Arms” By Ernest Hemingway 27

The medical captain, “What hit you?” Me, with the eyes shut, “A trench mortar shell.”
The captain, doing things that hurt sharply and severing tissue—”Are you sure?”
Me—trying to lie still and feeling my stomach flutter when the flesh was cut, “I think
so.” Captain doctor—(interested in something he was finding), “Fragments of enemy
trench-mortar shell. Now I’ll probe for some of this if you like but it’s not necessary.
I’ll paint all this and—Does that sting? Good, that’s nothing to how it will feel later.
The pain hasn’t started yet. Bring him a glass of brandy. The shock dulls the pain;
but this is all right, you have nothing to worry about if it doesn’t infect and it rarely
does now. How is your head?” “Good Christ” I said. “Better not drink too much
brandy then. If you’ve got a fracture you don’t want inflammation. How does that
feel?” Sweat ran all over me. “Good Christ!” I said. “I guess you’ve got a fracture all
right. I’ll wrap you up and don’t bounce your head around.” He bandaged, his hands
moving very fast and the bandage coming taut and sure. “All right, good luck and
Vive la France.” “He’s an American,” one of the other captains said. “I thought you
said he was a Frenchman. He talks French,” the captain said. “I’ve known him
before. I always thought he was French.” He drank a half tumbler of cognac. “Bring
on something serious. Get some more of that Antitetanus.” The captain waved to
me. They lifted me and the blanket-flap went across my face as we went out.
Outside the sergeant-adjutant knelt down beside me where I lay, “Name?” he asked
softly. “Middle name? First name? Rank? Where born? What class? What corps?”
and so on. “I’m sorry for your head, Tenente. I hope you feel better. I’m sending you
now with the English ambulance.” “I’m all right,” I said. “Thank you very much.” The
pain that the major had spoken about had started and all that was happening was
without interest or relation. After a while the English ambulance came up and they
put me onto a stretcher and lifted the stretcher up to the ambulance level and
shoved it in. There was another stretcher by the side with a man on it whose nose I
could see, waxy-looking, out of the bandages. He breathed very heavily. There were
stretchers lifted and slid into the slings above. The tall English driver came around
and looked in, “I’ll take it very easily,” he said. “I hope you’ll be comfy.” I felt the
engine start, felt him climb up into the front seat, felt the brake come off and the
clutch go in, then we started. I lay still and let the pain ride. As the ambulance
climbed along the road, it was slow in the traffic, sometimes it stopped, sometimes it
backed on a turn, then finally it climbed quite fast. I felt something dripping. At first it
dropped slowly and regularly, then it pattered into a stream. I shouted to the driver.
He stopped the car and looked in through the hole behind his seat. “What is it?” “The
man on the stretcher over me has a hemorrhage.” “We’re not far from the top. I
wouldn’t be able to get the stretcher out alone.” He started the car. The stream kept
on. In the dark I could not see where it came from the canvas overhead. I tried to
move sideways so that it did not fall on me. Where it had run down under my shirt it
was warm and sticky. I was cold and my leg hurt so that it made me sick. After a
while the stream from the stretcher above lessened and started to drip again and I
heard and felt the canvas above move as the man on the stretcher settled more
comfortably. “How is he?” the Englishman called back. “We’re almost up.” “He’s
dead I think,” I said. The drops fell very slowly, as they fall from an icicle after the
sun has gone. It was cold

“A Farewell to Arms” By Ernest Hemingway 28

in the car in the night as the road climbed. At the post on the top they took the
stretcher out and put another in and we went on.
10
In the ward at the field hospital they told me a visitor was coming to see me in the
afternoon. It was a hot day and there were many flies in the room. My orderly had
cut paper into strips and tied the strips to a stick to make a brush that swished the
flies away. I watched them settle on the ceiling. When he stopped swishing and fell
asleep they came down and I blew them away and finally covered my face with my
hands and slept too. It was very hot and when I woke my legs itched. I waked the
orderly and he poured mineral water on the dressings. That made the bed damp and
cool. Those of us that were awake talked across the ward. The afternoon was a
quiet time. In the morning they came to each bed in turn, three men nurses and a
doctor and picked you up out of bed and carried you into the dressing room so that
the beds could be made while we were having our wounds dressed. It was not a
pleasant trip to the dressing room and I did not know until later that beds could be
made with men in them. My orderly had finished pouring water and the bed felt cool
and lovely and I was telling him where to scratch on the soles of my feet against the
itching when one of the doctors brought in Rinaldi. He came in very fast and bent
down over the bed and kissed me. I saw he wore gloves. “How are you, baby? How
do you feel? I bring you this—” It was a bottle of cognac. The orderly brought a chair
and he sat down, “and good news. You will be decorated. They want to get you the
medaglia d’argento but perhaps they can get only the bronze.” “What for?” “Because
you are gravely wounded. They say if you can prove you did any heroic act you can
get the silver. Otherwise it will be the bronze. Tell me exactly what happened. Did
you do any heroic act?” “No,” I said. “I was blown up while we were eating cheese.”
“Be serious. You must have done something heroic either before or after. Remember
carefully.” “I did not.” “Didn’t you carry anybody on your back? Gordini says you
carried several people on your back but the medical major at the first post declares it
is impossible. He had to sign the proposition for the citation.” “I didn’t carry anybody.
I couldn’t move.” “That doesn’t matter,” said Rinaldi. He took off his gloves. “I think
we can get you the silver. Didn’t you refuse to be medically aided before the others?”
“Not very firmly.” “That doesn’t matter. Look how you are wounded. Look at your
valorous conduct in asking to go always to the first line. Besides, the operation was
successful.” “Did they cross the river all right?” “Enormously. They take nearly a
thousand prisoners. It’s in the bulletin. Didn’t you see it?” “No.” “I’ll bring it to you. It is
a successful coup de main.” “How is everything?” “Splendid. We are all splendid.
Everybody is proud of you. Tell me just exactly how it happened. I am positive you
will get the silver. Go on tell me. Tell me all about it.” He paused and thought.
“Maybe you will get an English medal too. There was an English there. I’ll go and
see him and ask if he will recommend you. He ought to be able to do something. Do
you suffer much? Have a drink. Orderly, go get a corkscrew. Oh you should see
what I did in the removal of three metres of small intestine and better now
“A Farewell to Arms” By Ernest Hemingway 29
than ever. It is one for The Lancet. You do me a translation and I will send it to The
Lancet. Every day I am better. Poor dear baby, how do you feel? Where is that damn
corkscrew? You are so brave and quiet I forget you are suffering.” He slapped his
gloves on the edge of the bed. “Here is the corkscrew, Signor Tenente,” the orderly
said. “Open the bottle. Bring a glass. Drink that, baby. How is your poor head? I
looked at your papers. You haven’t any fracture. That major at the first post was a
hog-butcher. I would take you and never hurt you. I never hurt anybody. I learn how
to do it. Every day I learn to do things smoother and better. You must forgive me for
talking so much, baby. I am very moved to see you badly wounded. There, drink
that. It’s good. It cost fifteen lire. It ought to be good. Five stars. After I leave here I’ll
go see that English and he’ll get you an English medal.” “They don’t give them like
that.” “You are so modest. I will send the liaison officer. He can handle the English.”
“Have you seen Miss Barkley?” “I will bring her here. I will go now and bring her
here.” “Don’t go,” I said. “Tell me about Gorizia. How are the girls?” “There are no
girls. For two weeks now they haven’t changed them. I don’t go there any more. It is
disgraceful. They aren’t girls; they are old war comrades.” “You don’t go at all?” “I
just go to see if there is anything new. I stop by. They all ask for you. It is a disgrace
that they should stay so long that they become friends.” “Maybe girls don’t want to
go to the front any more.” “Of course they do. They have plenty of girls. It is just bad
administration. They are keeping them for the pleasure of dugout hiders in the rear.”
“Poor Rinaldi,” I said. “All alone at the war with no new girls.” Rinaldi poured himself
another glass of the cognac. “I don’t think it will hurt you, baby. You take it.” I drank
the cognac and felt it warm all the way down. Rinaldi poured another glass. He was
quieter now. He held up the glass. “To your valorous wounds. To the silver medal.
Tell me, baby, when you lie here all the time in the hot weather don’t you get
excited?” “Sometimes.” “I can’t imagine lying like that. I would go crazy.” “You are
crazy.” “I wish you were back. No one to come in at night from adventures. No one to
make fun of. No one to lend me money. No blood brother and roommate. Why do
you get yourself wounded?” “You can make fun of the priest.” “That priest. It isn’t me
that makes fun of him. It is the captain. I like him. If you must have a priest have that
priest. He’s coming to see you. He makes big preparations.” “I like him.” “Oh, I knew
it. Sometimes I think you and he are a little that way. You know.” “No, you don’t.”
“Yes, I do sometimes. A little that way like the number of the first regiment of the
Brigata Ancona.” “Oh, go to hell.” He stood up and put on his gloves. “Oh I love to
tease you, baby. With your priest and your English girl, and really you are just like
me underneath.” “No, I’m not.” “Yes, we are. You are really an Italian. All fire and
smoke and nothing inside. You only pretend to be American. We are brothers and
we love each other.” “Be good while I’m gone,” I said. “I will send Miss Barkley. You
are better with her without me. You are purer and sweeter.”

“A Farewell to Arms” By Ernest Hemingway 30

“Oh, go to hell.” “I will send her. Your lovely cool goddess. English goddess. My God
what would a man do with a woman like that except worship her? What else is an
Englishwoman good for?” “You are an ignorant foul-mouthed dago.” “A what?” “An
ignorant wop.” “Wop. You are a frozen-faced… wop.” “You are ignorant. Stupid.” I
saw that word pricked him and kept on. “Uninformed. Inexperienced, stupid from
inexperience.” “Truly? I tell you something about your good women. Your
goddesses. There is only one difference between taking a girl who has always been
good and a woman. With a girl it is painful. That’s all I know.” He slapped the bed
with his glove. “And you never know if the girl will really like it.” “Don’t get angry.” “I’m
not angry. I just tell you, baby, for your own good. To save you trouble.” “That’s the
only difference?” “Yes. But millions of fools like you don’t know it.” “You were sweet
to tell me.” “We won’t quarrel, baby. I love you too much. But don’t be a fool.” “No. I’ll
be wise like you.” “Don’t be angry, baby. Laugh. Take a drink. I must go, really.”
“You’re a good old boy.” “Now you see. Underneath we are the same. We are war
brothers. Kiss me good-by.” “You’re sloppy.” “No. I am just more affectionate.” I felt
his breath come toward me. “Good-by. I come to see you again soon.” His breath
went away. “I won’t kiss you if you don’t want. I’ll send your English girl. Good-by,
baby. The cognac is under the bed. Get well soon.” He was gone.
11
It was dusk when the priest came. They had brought the soup and afterward taken
away the bowls and I was lying looking at the rows of beds and out the window at
the tree-top that moved a little in the evening breeze. The breeze came in through
the window and it was cooler with the evening. The flies were on the ceiling now and
on the electric light bulbs that hung on wires. The lights were only turned on when
some one was brought in at night or when something was being done. It made me
feel very young to have the dark come after the dusk and then remain. It was like
being put to bed after early supper. The orderly came down between the beds and
stopped. Some one was with him. It was the priest. He stood there small, brownfaced, and embarrassed. “How do you do?” he asked. He put some packages down
by the bed, on the floor. “All right, father.” He sat down in the chair that had been
brought for Rinaldi and looked out of the window embarrassedly. I noticed his face
looked Very tired. “I can only stay a minute,” he said. “It is late.” “It’s not late. How is
the mess?” He smiled. “I am still a great joke,” he sounded tired too. “Thank God
they are all well. “I am so glad you are all right,” he said. “I hope you don’t suffer.” He
seemed very tired and I was not used to seeing him tired. “Not any more.” “I miss
you at the mess.” “I wish I were there. I always enjoyed our talking.” “I brought you a
few little things,” he said. He picked up the packages. “This is
“A Farewell to Arms” By Ernest Hemingway 31
mosquito netting. This is a bottle of vermouth. You like vermouth? These are English
papers.” “Please open them.” He was pleased and undid them. I held the mosquito
netting in my hands. The vermouth he held up for me to see and then put it on the
floor beside the bed. I held up one of the sheaf of English papers. I could read the
headlines by turning it so the half-light from the window was on it. It was The News
of the World. “The others are illustrated,” he said. “It will be a great happiness to
read them. Where did you get them?” “I sent for them to Mestre. I will have more.”
“You were very good to come, father. Will you drink a glass of vermouth?” “Thank
you. You keep it. It’s for you.” “No, drink a glass.” “All right. I will bring you more
then.” The orderly brought the glasses and opened the bottle. He broke off the cork
and the end had to be shoved down into the bottle. I could see the priest was
disappointed but he said, “That’s all right. It’s no matter.” “Here’s to your health,
father.” “To your better health.” Afterward he held the glass in his hand and we
looked at one another. Sometimes we talked and were good friends but to-night it
was difficult. “What’s the matter, father? You seem very tired.” “I am tired but I have
no right to be.” “It’s the heat.” “No. This is only the spring. I feel very low.” “You have
the war disgust.” “No. But I hate the war.” “I don’t enjoy it,” I said. He shook his head
and looked out of the window. “You do not mind it. You do not see it. You must
forgive me. I know you are wounded.” “That is an accident.” “Still even wounded you
do not see it. I can tell. I do not see it myself but I feel it a little.” “When I was
wounded we were talking about it. Passini was talking.” The priest put down the
glass. He was thinking about something else. “I know them because I am like they
are,” he said. “You are different though.” “But really I am like they are.” “The officers
don’t see anything.” “Some of them do. Some are very delicate and feel worse than
any of us.” “They are mostly different.” “It is not education or money. It is something
else. Even if they had education or money men like Passini would not wish to be
officers. I would not be an officer.” “You rank as an officer. I am an officer.” “I am not
really. You are not even an Italian. You are a foreigner. But you are nearer the
officers than you are to the men.” “What is the difference?” “I cannot say it easily.
There are people who would make war. In this country there are many like that.
There are other people who would not make war.” “But the first ones make them do
it.” “Yes.” “And I help them.” “You are a foreigner. You are a patriot.” “And the ones
who would not make war? Can they stop it?” I do not know. He looked out of the
window again. I watched his face. “Have they ever been able to stop it?”

“A Farewell to Arms” By Ernest Hemingway 32

“They are not organized to stop things and when they get organized their leaders sell
them out.” “Then it’s hopeless?” “It is never hopeless. But sometimes I cannot hope.
I try always to hope but sometimes I cannot.” “Maybe the war will be over.” “I hope
so.” “What will you do then?” “If it is possible I will return to the Abruzzi.” His brown
face was suddenly very happy. “You love the Abruzzi?” “Yes, I love it very much.”
“You ought to go there then.” “I would be too happy. If I could live there and love God
and serve Him.” “And be respected,” I said. “Yes and be respected. Why not?” “No
reason not. You should be respected.” “It does not matter. But there in my country it
is understood that a man may love God. It is not a dirty joke.” “I understand.” He
looked at me and smiled. “You understand but you do not love God.” “No.” “You do
not love Him at all?” he asked. “I am afraid of Him in the night sometimes.” “You
should love Him.” “I don’t love much.” “Yes,” he said. “You do. What you tell me
about in the nights. That is not love. That is only passion and lust. When you love
you wish to do things for. You wish to sacrifice for. You wish to serve.” “I don’t love.”
“You will. I know you will. Then you will be happy.” “I’m happy. I’ve always been
happy.” “It is another thing. You cannot know about it unless you have it.” “Well,” I
said. “If I ever get it I will tell you.” “I stay too long and talk too much.” He was
worried that he really did. “No. Don’t go. How about loving women? If I really loved
some woman would it be like that?” “I don’t know about that. I never loved any
woman.” “What about your mother?” “Yes, I must have loved my mother.” “Did you
always love God?” “Ever since I was a little boy.” “Well,” I said. I did not know what
to say. “You are a fine boy,” I said. “I am a boy,” he said. “But you call me father.”
“That’s politeness.” He smiled. “I must go, really,” he said. “You do not want me for
anything?” he asked hopefully. “No. Just to talk.” “I will take your greetings to the
mess.” “Thank you for the many fine presents.” “Nothing.” “Come and see me again.”
“Yes. Good-by,” he patted my hand. “So long,” I said in dialect.

“A Farewell to Arms” By Ernest Hemingway 33

“Ciaou,” he repeated. It was dark in the room and the orderly, who had sat by the
foot of the bed, got up and went out with him. I liked him very much and I hoped he
would get back to the Abruzzi some time. He had a rotten life in the mess and he
was fine about it but I thought how he would be in his own country. At Capracotta, he
had told me, there were trout in the stream below the town. It was forbidden to play
the flute at night. When the young men serenaded only the flute was forbidden. Why,
I had asked. Because it was bad for the girls to hear the flute at night. The peasants
all called you “Don” and when you met them they took off their hats. His father
hunted every day and stopped to eat at the houses of peasants. They were always
honored. For a foreigner to hunt he must present a certificate that he had never been
arrested. There were bears on the Gran Sasso D’Italia but it was a long way. Aquila
was a fine town. It was cool in the summer at night and the spring in Abruzzi was the
most beautiful in Italy. But what was lovely was the fall to go hunting through the
chestnut woods. The birds were all good because they fed on grapes and you never
took a lunch because the peasants were always honored if you would eat with them
at their houses. After a while I went to sleep.
12
The room was long with windows on the right-hand side and a door at the far end
that went into the dressing room. The row of beds that mine was in faced the
windows and another row, under the windows, faced the wall. If you lay on your left
side you could see the dressing-room door. There was another door at the far end
that people sometimes came in by. If any one were going to die they put a screen
around the bed so you could not see them die, but only the shoes and puttees of
doctors and men nurses showed under the bottom of the screen and sometimes at
the end there would be whispering. Then the priest would come out from behind the
screen and afterward the men nurses would go back behind the screen to come out
again carrying the one who was dead with a blanket over him down the corridor
between the beds and some one folded the screen and took it away. That morning
the major in charge of the ward asked me if I felt that I could travel the next day. I
said I could. He said then they would ship me out early in the morning. He said I
would be better off making the trip now before it got too hot. When they lifted you up
out of bed to carry you into the dressing room you could look out of the window and
see the new graves in the garden. A soldier sat outside the door that opened onto
the garden making crosses and painting on them the names, rank, and regiment of
the men who were buried in the garden. He also ran errands for the ward and in his
spare time made me a cigarette lighter out of an empty Austrian rifle cartridge. The
doctors were very nice and seemed very capable. They were anxious to ship me to
Milan where there were better X-ray facilities and where, after the operation, I could
take mechano-therapy. I wanted to go to Milan too. They wanted to get us all out and
back as far as possible because all the beds were needed for the offensive, when it
should start. The night before I left the field hospital Rinaldi came in to see me with
the major from our mess. They said that I would go to an American hospital in Milan
that had just been installed. Some American ambulance units were to be sent down
and this hospital would look after them and any other Americans on service in Italy.
There were many in the Red Cross. The States had declared war on Germany but
not on Austria. The Italians were sure America would declare war on Austria too and
they were very excited about any Americans coming down, even the Red Cross.
They asked me if I thought President Wilson would declare war on Austria and I said
it was only a matter of days. I did not know what we had against Austria but it
seemed logical that they should declare war on her if they did on Germany. They
asked me if we would declare war on Turkey. I said that was doubtful. Turkey, I said,
was our national bird but the joke translated so badly and they were so puzzled and
suspicious that I said yes, we would probably declare war on Turkey. And on
Bulgaria? We had drunk several glasses of
“A Farewell to Arms” By Ernest Hemingway 34
brandy and I said yes by God on Bulgaria too and on Japan. But, they said, Japan is
an ally of England. You can’t trust the bloody English. The Japanese want Hawaii, I
said. Where is Hawaii? It is in the Pacific Ocean. Why do the Japanese want it?
They don’t really want it, I said. That is all talk. The Japanese are a wonderful little
people fond of dancing and light wines. Like the French, said the major. We will get
Nice and Savoia from the French. We will get Corsica and all the Adriatic coast-line,
Rinaldi said. Italy will return to the splendors of Rome, said the major. I don’t like
Rome, I said. It is hot and full of fleas. You don’t like Rome? Yes, I love Rome.
Rome is the mother of nations. I will never forget Romulus suckling the Tiber. What?
Nothing. Let’s all go to Rome. Let’s go to Rome to-night and never come back.
Rome is a beautiful city, said the major. The mother and father of nations, I said.
Roma is feminine, said Rinaldi. It cannot be the father. Who is the father, then, the
Holy Ghost? Don’t blaspheme. I wasn’t blaspheming, I was asking for information.
You are drunk, baby. Who made me drunk? I made you drunk, said the major. I
made you drunk because I love you and because America is in the war. Up to the
hilt, I said. You go away in the morning, baby, Rinaldi said. To Rome, I said. No, to
Milan. To Milan, said the major, to the Crystal Palace, to the Cova, to Campari’s, to
Biffi’s, to the galleria. You lucky boy. To the Gran Italia, I said, where I will borrow
money from George. To the Scala, said Rinaldi. You will go to the Scala. Every
night, I said. You won’t be able to afford it every night, said the major. The tickets are
very expensive. I will draw a sight draft on my grandfather, I said. A what? A sight
draft. He has to pay or I go to jail. Mr. Cunningham at the bank does it. I live by sight
drafts. Can a grandfather jail a patriotic grandson who is dying that Italy may live?
Live the American Garibaldi, said Rinaldi. Viva the sight drafts, I said. We must be
quiet, said the major. Already we have been asked many times to be quiet. Do you
go to-morrow really, Federico? He goes to the American hospital I tell you, Rinaldi
said. To the beautiful nurses. Not the nurses with beards of the field hospital. Yes,
yes, said the major, I know he goes to the American hospital. I don’t mind their
beards, I said. If any man wants to raise a beard let him. Why don’t you raise a
beard, Signor Maggiore? It could not go in a gas mask. Yes it could. Anything can go
in a gas mask. I’ve vomited into a gas mask. Don’t be so loud, baby, Rinaldi said.
We all know you have been at the front Oh, you fine baby, what will I do while you
are gone? We must go, said the major. This becomes sentimental. Listen, I have a
surprise for you. Your English. You know? The English you go to see every night at
their hospital? She is going to Milan too. She goes with another to be at the
American hospital. They had not got nurses yet from America. I talked to-day with
the head of their riparto. They have too many Women here at the front. They send
some back. How do you like that, baby? All right. Yes? You go to live in a big city
and have your English there to cuddle you. Why don’t I get wounded? Maybe you
will, I said. We must go, said the major. We drink and make noise and disturb
Federico. Don’t go. Yes, we must go. Good-by. Good luck. Many things. Ciaou.
Ciaou. Ciaou. Come back quickly, baby. Rinaldi kissed me. You smell of lysol. Goodby, baby. Good-by. Many things. The major patted my shoulder. They tiptoed out. I
found I was quite drunk but went to sleep. The next day in the morning we left for
Milan and arrived forty-eight hours later. It was a bad trip. We were sidetracked for a
long time this side of Mestre and children came and peeked in. I got a little boy to go
for a bottle of cognac but he came back and said he could only get grappa. I told him
to get it and when it came I gave him the change and the man beside me and I got
drunk and slept until past Vicenza where I woke up and was very sick on the floor. It
did not matter because the man on that side had been very sick on the floor several
times before. Afterward I thought I could not stand the thirst and in the yards outside
of Verona I called to a soldier who was walking up and down beside the train and he
got me a drink of water. I woke Georgetti, the other boy who was drunk, and offered
him some water. He said to pour it on his shoulder and went back to sleep. The
soldier would not take the penny I offered him and brought me a pulpy orange. I
sucked on that and spit out the pith and watched the soldier pass up and down past
a freight-car outside and after a while the train gave a jerk and started.

“A Farewell to Arms” By Ernest Hemingway 35

Book Two
13
We got into Milan early in the morning and they unloaded us in the freight yard. An
ambulance took me to the American hospital. Riding in the ambulance on a stretcher
I could not tell what part of town we were passing through but when they unloaded
the stretcher I saw a market-place and an open wine shop with a girl sweeping out.
They were watering the street and it smelled of the early morning. They put the
stretcher down and went in. The porter came out with them. He had gray mustaches,
wore a doorman’s cap and was in his shirt sleeves. The stretcher would not go into
the elevator and they discussed whether it was better to lift me off the stretcher and
go up in the elevator or carry the stretcher up the stairs. I listened to them discussing
it. They decided on the elevator. They lifted me from the stretcher. “Go easy,” I said.
“Take it softly.” In the elevator we were crowded and as my legs bent the pain was
very bad. “Straighten out the legs,” I said. “We can’t, Signor Tenente. There isn’t
room.” The man who said this had his arm around me and my arm was around his
neck. His breath came in my face metallic with garlic and red wine. “Be gentle,” the
other man said. “Son of a bitch who isn’t gentle!” “Be gentle I say,” the man with my
feet repeated. I saw the doors of the elevator closed, and the grill shut and the
fourth-floor button pushed by the porter. The porter looked worried. The elevator
rose slowly. “Heavy?” I asked the man with the garlic. “Nothing,” he said. His face
was sweating and he grunted. The elevator rose steadily and stopped. The man
holding the feet opened the door and stepped out. We were on a balcony. There
were several doors with brass knobs. The man carrying the feet pushed a button that
rang a bell. We heard it inside the doors. No one came. Then the porter came up the
stairs. “Where are they?” the stretcher-bearers asked. “I don’t know,” said the porter.
“They sleep down stairs.” “Get somebody.” The porter rang the bell, then knocked on
the door, then he opened the door and went in. When he came back there was an
elderly woman wearing glasses with him. Her hair was loose and half-falling and she
wore a nurse’s dress. “I can’t understand,” she said. “I can’t understand Italian.” “I
can speak English,” I said. “They want to put me somewhere.” “None of the rooms
are ready. There isn’t any patient expected.” She tucked at her hair and looked at
me near-sightedly. “Show them any room where they can put me.” “I don’t know,”
she said. “There’s no patient expected. I couldn’t put you in just any room.” “Any
room will do,” I said. Then to the porter in Italian, “Find an empty room.” “They are all
empty,” said the porter. “You are the first patient.” He held his cap in his hand and
looked at the elderly nurse. “For Christ’s sweet sake take me to some room.” The
pain had gone on and on with the legs bent and I could feel it going in and out of the
bone. The porter went in the door, followed by the grayhaired woman, then came
hurrying back. “Follow me,” he said. They carried me down a long hallway and into a
room with drawn blinds. It smelled of new furniture. There was a bed and a big
wardrobe with a mirror. They laid me down on the bed. “I can’t put on sheets,” the
woman said. “The sheets are locked up.” I did not speak to her. “There is money in
my pocket,” I said to the porter. “In the
“A Farewell to Arms” By Ernest Hemingway 36
buttoned-down pocket.” The porter took out the money. The two stretcher-bearers
stood beside the bed holding their caps. “Give them five lire apiece and five lire for
yourself. My papers are in the other pocket. You may give them to the nurse.” The
stretcher-bearers saluted and said thank you. “Good-by,” I said. “And many thanks.”
They saluted again and went out. “Those papers,” I said to the nurse, “describe my
case and the treatment already given.” The woman picked them up and looked at
them through her glasses. There were three papers and they were folded. “I don’t
know what to do,” she said. “I can’t read Italian. I can’t do anything without the
doctor’s orders.” She commenced to cry and put the papers in her apron pocket.
“Are you an American?” she asked crying. “Yes. Please put the papers on the table
by the bed.” It was dim and cool in the room. As I lay on the bed I could see the big
mirror on the other side of the room but could not see what it reflected. The porter
stood by the bed. He had a nice face and was very kind. “You can go,” I said to him.
“You can go too,” I said to the nurse. “What is your name?” “Mrs. Walker.” “You can
go, Mrs. Walker. I think I will go to sleep.” I was alone in the room. It was cool and
did not smell like a hospital. The mattress was firm and comfortable and I lay without
moving, hardly breathing, happy in feeling the pain lessen. After a while I wanted a
drink of water and found the bell on a cord by the bed and rang it but nobody came. I
went to sleep. When I woke I looked around. There was sunlight coming in through
the shutters. I saw the big armoire, the bare walls, and two chairs. My legs in the
dirty bandages, stuck straight out in the bed. I was careful not to move them. I was
thirsty and I reached for the bell and pushed the button. I heard the door open and
looked and it was a nurse. She looked young and pretty. “Good-morning,” I said.
“Good-morning,” she said and came over to the bed. “We haven’t been able to get
the doctor. He’s gone to Lake Como. No one knew there was a patient coming.
What’s wrong with you anyway?” “I’m wounded. In the legs and feet and my head is
hurt.” “What’s your name?” “Henry. Frederic Henry.” “I’ll wash you up. But we can’t
do anything to the dressings until the doctor comes.” “Is Miss Barkley here?” “No.
There’s no one by that name here.” “Who was the woman who cried when I came
in?” The nurse laughed. “That’s Mrs. Walker. She was on night duty and she’d been
asleep. She wasn’t expecting any one.” While we were talking she was undressing
me, and when I was undressed, except for the bandages, she washed me, very
gently and smoothly. The washing felt very good. There was a bandage on my head
but she washed all around the edge. “Where were you wounded?” “On the Isonze
north of Plava.” “Where is that?” “North of Gorizia.” I could see that none of the
places meant anything to her. “Do you have a lot of pain?” “No. Not much now.” She
put a thermometer in my mouth. “The Italians put it under the arm,” I said. “Don’t
talk.” When she took the thermometer out she read it and then shook it. “What’s the
temperature?”

“A Farewell to Arms” By Ernest Hemingway 37

“You’re not supposed to know that.” “Tell me what it is.” “It’s almost normal.” “I never
have any fever. My legs are full of old iron too.” “What do you mean?” “They’re full of
trench-mortar fragments, old screws and bedsprings and things.” She shook her
head and smiled. “If you had any foreign bodies in your legs they would set up an
inflammation and you’d have fever.” “All right,” I said. “We’ll see what comes out.”
She went out of the room and came back with the old nurse of the early morning.
Together they made the bed with me in it. That was new to me and an admirable
proceeding. “Who is in charge here?” “Miss Van Campen.” “How many nurses are
there?” “Just us two.” “Won’t there be more?” “Some more are coming.” “When will
they get here?” “I don’t know. You ask a great many questions for a sick boy.” “I’m
not sick,” I said. “I’m wounded.” They had finished making the bed and I lay with a
clean smooth sheet under me and another sheet over me. Mrs. Walker went out and
came back with a pajama jacket. They put that on me and I felt very clean and
dressed. “You’re awfully nice to me,” I said. The nurse called Miss Gage giggled.
“Could I have a drink of water?” I asked. “Certainly. Then you can have breakfast.” “I
don’t want breakfast. Can I have the shutters opened please?” The light had been
dim in the room and when the shutters were opened it was bright sunlight and I
looked out on a balcony and beyond were the tile roofs of houses and chimneys. I
looked out over the tiled roofs and saw white clouds and the sky very blue. “Don’t
you know when the other nurses are coming?” “Why? Don’t we take good care of
you?” “You’re very nice.” “Would you like to use the bedpan?” “I might try.” They
helped me and held me up but it was not any use. Afterward I lay and looked out the
open doors onto the balcony. “When does the doctor come?” “When he gets back.
We’ve tried to telephone to Lake Como for him.” “Aren’t there any other doctors?”
“He’s the doctor for the hospital.” Miss Gage brought a pitcher of water and a glass. I
drank three glasses and then they left me and I looked out the window a while and
went back to sleep. I ate some lunch and in the afternoon Miss Van Campen, the
superintendent, came up to see me. She did not like me and I did not like her. She
was small and neatly suspicious and too good for her position. She asked many
questions and seemed to think it was somewhat disgraceful that I was with the
Italians. “Can I have wine with the meals?” I asked her. “Only if the doctor prescribes
it.” “I can’t have it until he comes?” “Absolutely not.” “You plan on having him come
eventually?” “We’ve telephoned him at Lake Como.”

“A Farewell to Arms” By Ernest Hemingway 38

She went out and Miss Gage came back. “Why were you rude to Miss Van
Campen?” she asked after she had done something for me very skilfully. “I didn’t
mean to be. But she was snooty.” “She said you were domineering and rude.” “I
wasn’t. But what’s the idea of a hospital without a doctor?” “He’s coming. They’ve
telephoned for him to Lake Como.” “What does he do there? Swim?” “No. He has a
clinic there.” “Why don’t they get another doctor?” “Hush. Hush. Be a good boy and
he’ll come.” I sent for the porter and when he came I told him in Italian to get me a
bottle of Cinzano at the wine shop, a fiasco of chianti and the evening papers. He
went away and brought them wrapped in newspaper, unwrapped them and, when I
asked him to, drew the corks and put the wine and vermouth under the bed. They
left me alone and I lay in bed and read the papers awhile, the news from the front,
and the list of dead officers with their decorations and then reached down and
brought up the bottle of Cinzano and held it straight up on my stomach, the cool
glass against my stomach, and took little drinks making rings on my stomach from
holding the bottle there between drinks, and watched it get dark outside over the
roofs of the town. The swallows circled around and I watched them and the nighthawks flying above the roofs and drank the Cinzano. Miss Gage brought up a glass
with some eggnog in it. I lowered the vermouth bottle to the other side of the bed
when she came in. “Miss Van Campen had some sherry put in this,” she said. “You
shouldn’t be rude to her. She’s not young and this hospital is a big responsibility for
her. Mrs. Walker’s too old and she’s no use to her.” “She’s a splendid woman,” I
said. “Thank her very much.” “I’m going to bring your supper right away.” “That’s all
right,” I said. “I’m not hungry.” When she brought the tray and put it on the bed table I
thanked her and ate a little of the supper. Afterward it was dark outside and I could
see the beams of the search-lights moving in the sky. I watched for a while and then
went to sleep. I slept heavily except once I woke sweating and scared and then went
back to sleep trying to stay outside of my dream. I woke for good long before it was
light and heard roosters crowing and stayed on awake until it began to be light. I was
tired and once it was really light I went back to sleep again.
14
It was bright sunlight in the room when I woke. I thought I was back at the front and
stretched out in bed. My legs hurt me and I looked down at them still in the dirty
bandages, and seeing them knew where I was. I reached up for the bell-cord and
pushed the button. I heard it buzz down the hall and then some one coming on
rubber soles along the hall. It was Miss Gage and she looked a little older in the
bright sunlight and not so pretty. “Good-morning,” she said. “Did you have a good
night?” “Yes. Thanks very much,” I said. “Can I have a barber?” “I came in to see
you and you were asleep with this in the bed with you.” She opened the armoire door
and held up the vermouth bottle. It was nearly empty. “I put the other bottle from
under the bed in there too,” she said. “Why didn’t you ask me for a glass?” “I thought
maybe you wouldn’t let me have it.” “I’d have had some with you.” “You’re a fine girl.”
“It isn’t good for you to drink alone,” she said. “You mustn’t do it.”
“A Farewell to Arms” By Ernest Hemingway 39
“All right.” “Your friend Miss Barkley’s come,” she said. “Really?” “Yes. I don’t like
her.” “You will like her. She’s awfully nice.” She shook her head. “I’m sure she’s fine.
Can you move just a little to this side? That’s fine. I’ll clean you up for breakfast.”
She washed me with a cloth and soap and warm water. “Hold your shoulder up,” she
said. “That’s fine.” “Can I have the barber before breakfast?” “I’ll send the porter for
him.” She went out and came back. “He’s gone for him,” she said and dipped the
cloth she held in the basin of water. The barber came with the porter. He was a man
of about fifty with an upturned mustache. Miss Gage was finished with me and went
out and the barber lathered my face and shaved. He was very solemn and refrained
from talking. “What’s the matter? Don’t you know any news?” I asked. “What news?”
“Any news. What’s happened in the town?” “It is time of wai” he said. “The enemy’s
ears are everywhere.” I looked up at him. “Please hold your face still,” he said and
went on shaving. “I will tell nothing.” “What’s the matter with you?” I asked. “I am an
Italian. I will not communicate with the enemy.” I let it go at that. If he was crazy, the
sooner I could get out from under the razor the better. Once I tried to get a good look
at him. “Beware,” he said. “The razor is sharp.” I paid him when it was over and
tipped him half a lira. He returned the coins. “I will not. I am not at the front. But I am
an Italian.” “Get the hell out of here.” “With your permission,” he said and wrapped
his razors in newspaper. He went out leaving the five copper coins on the table
beside the bed. I rang the bell. Miss Gage came in. “Would you ask the porter to
come please?” “All right.” The porter came in. He was trying to keep from laughing.
“Is that barber crazy?” “No, signorino. He made a mistake. He doesn’t understand
very well and he thought I said you were an Austrian officer.” “Oh,” I said. “Ho ho
ho,” the porter laughed. “He was funny. One move from you he said and he would
have—” he drew his forefinger across his throat. “Ho ho ho,” he tried to keep from
laughing. “When I tell him you were not an Austrian. Ho ho ho.” “Hoho ho,” I said
bitterly. “How funny if he would cut my throat. Ho ho ho.” “No, signorino. No, no. He
was so frightened of an Austrian. Ho ho ho.” “Ho ho ho,” I said. “Get out of here.” He
went out and I heard him laughing in the hall. I heard some one coming down the
hallway. I looked toward the door. It was Catherine Barkley. She came in the room
and over to the bed. “Hello, darling,” she said. She looked fresh and young and very
beautiful. I thought I had never seen any one so beautiful. “Hello,” I said. When I saw
her I was in love with her. Everything turned over inside of me. She looked toward
the door, saw there was no one, then she sat on the side of the bed and leaned over
and kissed me. I pulled her down and kissed her and felt her heart beating. “You
sweet,” I said. “Weren’t you wonderful to come here?” “It wasn’t very hard. It may be
hard to stay.” “You’ve got to stay,” I said. “Oh, you’re wonderful.” I was crazy about
her. I could not

“A Farewell to Arms” By Ernest Hemingway 40

believe she was really there and held her tight to me. “You mustn’t,” she said.
“You’re not well enough.” “Yes, I am. Come on.” “No. You’re not strong enough.”
“Yes. I am. Yes. Please.” “You do love me?” “I really love you. I’m crazy about you.
Come on please.” “Feel our hearts beating.” “I don’t care about our hearts. I want
you. I’m just mad about you.” “You really love me?” “Don’t keep on saying that.
Come on. Please. Please, Catherine.” “All right but only for a minute.” “All right,” I
said. “Shut the door.” “You can’t. You shouldn’t.” “Come on. Don’t talk. Please come
on.” Catherine sat in a chair by the bed. The door was open into the hall. The
wildness was gone and I felt finer than I had ever felt. She asked, “Now do you
believe I love you?” “Oh, you’re lovely,” I said. “You’ve got to stay. They can’t send
you away. I’m crazy in love with you.” “We’ll have to be awfully careful. That was just
madness. We can’t do that.” “We can at night.” “We’ll have to be awfully careful.
You’ll have to be careful in front of other people.” “I will.” “You’ll have to be. You’re
sweet. You do love me, don’t you?” “Don’t say that again. You don’t know what that
does to me.” “I’ll be careful then. I don’t want to do anything more to you. I have to
go now, darling, really.” “Come back right away.” “I’ll come when I can.” “Good-by.”
“Good-by, sweet.” She went out. God knows I had not wanted to fall in love with her.
I had not wanted to fall in love with any one. But God knows I had and I lay on the
bed in the room of the hospital in Milan and all sorts of things went through my head
but I felt wonderful and finally Miss Gage came in. “The doctor’s coming,” she said.
“He telephoned from Lake Como.” “When does he get here?” “He’ll be here this
afternoon.”
15
Nothing happened until afternoon. The doctor was a thin quiet little man who
seemed disturbed by the war. He took out a number of small steel splinters from my
thighs with delicate and refined distaste. He used a local anaesthetic called
something or other “snow,” which froze the tissue and avoided pain until the probe,
the scalpel or the forceps got below the frozen portion. The anxsthetized area was
clearly defined by the patient and after a time the doctor’s fragile delicacy was
exhausted and he said it would be better to have an X-ray. Probing was
unsatisfactory, he said. The X-ray was taken at the Ospedale Maggiore and the
doctor who did it was excitable, efficient and cheerful. It was arranged by holding up
the shoulders, that the patient should see personally some of the larger foreign
bodies through the machine. The plates were to be sent over. The doctor requested
me to write in his pocket notebook, my name, and regiment and some sentiment. He
declared that the foreign bodies were ugly, nasty, brutal. The Austrians were sons of
bitches. How many had I
“A Farewell to Arms” By Ernest Hemingway 41
killed? I had not killed any but I was anxious to please—and I said I had killed plenty.
Miss Gage was with me and the doctor put his arm around her and said she was
more beautiful than Cleopatra. Did she understand that? Cleopatra the former queen
of Egypt. Yes, by God she was. We returned to the little hospital in the ambulance
and after a while and much lifting I was upstairs and in bed again. The plates came
that afternoon, the doctor had said by God he would have them that afternoon and
he did. Catherine Barkley showed them to me. They were in red envelopes and she
took them out of the envelopes and held them up to the light and we both looked.
“That’s your right leg,” she said, then put the plate back in the envelope. “This is your
left.” “Put them away,” I said, “and come over to the bed.” “I can’t,” she said. “I just
brought them in for a second to show you.” She went out and I lay there. It was a hot
afternoon and I was sick of lying in bed. I sent the porter for the papers, all the
papers he could get. Before he came back three doctors came into the room. I have
noticed that doctors who fail in the practice of medicine have a tendency to seek one
another’s company and aid in consultation. A doctor who cannot take out your
appendix properly will recommend to you a doctor who will be unable to remove your
tonsils with success. These were three such doctors. “This is the young man,” said
the house doctor with the delicate hands. “How do you do?” said the tall gaunt doctor
with the beard. The third doctor, who carried the X-ray plates in their red envelopes,
said nothing. “Remove the dressings?” questioned the bearded doctor. “Certainly.
Remove the dressings, please, nurse,” the house doctor said to Miss Gage. Miss
Gage removed the dressings. I looked down at the legs. At the field hospital they
had the look of not too freshly ground hamburger steak. Now they were crusted and
the knee was swollen and discolored and the calf sunken but there was no pus.
“Very clean,” said the house doctor. “Very clean and nice.” “Urn,” said the doctor with
the beard. The third doctor looked over the house doctor’s shoulder. “Please move
the knee,” said the bearded doctor. “I can’t.” “Test the articulation?” the bearded
doctor questioned. He had a stripe beside the three stars on his sleeve. That meant
he was a first captain. “Certainly,” the house doctor said. Two of them took hold of
my right leg very gingerly and bent it. “That hurts,” I said. “Yes. Yes. A little further,
doctor.” “That’s enough. That’s as far as it goes,” I said. “Partial articulation,” said the
first captain. He straightened up. “May I see the plates again, please, doctor?” The
third doctor handed him one of the plates. “No. The left leg, please.” “That is the left
leg, doctor.” “You are right. I was looking from a different angle.” He returned the
plate. The other plate he examined for some time. “You see, doctor?” he pointed to
one of the foreign bodies which showed spherical and clear against the light. They
examined the plate for some time. “Only one thing I can say,” the first captain with
the beard said. “It is a question of time. Three months, six months probably.”
“Certainly the synovial fluid must re-form.” “Certainly. It is a question of time. I could
not conscientiously open a knee like that before the projectile was encysted.” “I
agree with you, doctor.” “Six months for what?” I asked. “Six months for the projectile
to encyst before the knee can be opened safely.”

“A Farewell to Arms” By Ernest Hemingway 42

“I don’t believe it,” I said. “Do you want to keep your knee, young man?” “No,” I said.
“What?” “I want it cut off,” I said, “so I can wear a hook on it.” “What do you mean? A
hook?” “He is joking,” said the house doctor. He patted my shoulder very delicately.
“He wants to keep his knee. This is a very brave young man. He has been proposed
for the silver medal of valor.” “All my felicitations,” said the first captain. He shook my
hand. “I can only say that to be on the safe side you should wait at least six months
before opening such a knee. You are welcome of course to another opinion.” “Thank
you very much,” I said. “I value your opinion.” The first captain looked at his watch.
“We must go,” he said. “All my best wishes.” “All my best wishes and many thanks,” I
said. I shook hands with the third doctor. “Capitano Varini—Tenente Enry,” and they
all three went out of the room. “Miss Gage,” I called. She came in. “Please ask the
house doctor to come back a minute.” He came in holding his cap and stood by the
bed. “Did you wish to see me?” “Yes. I can’t wait six months to be operated on. My
God, doctor, did you ever stay in bed six months?” “You won’t be in bed all the time.
You must first have the wounds exposed to the sun. Then afterward you can be on
crutches.” “For six months and then have an operation?” “That is the safe way. The
foreign bodies must be allowed to encyst and the synovial fluid will re-form. Then it
will be safe to open up the knee.” “Do you really think yourself I will have to wait that
long?” “That is the safe way.” “Who is that first captain?” “He is a very excellent
surgeon of Milan.” “He’s a first captain, isn’t he?” “Yes, but he is an excellent
surgeon.” “I don’t want my leg fooled with by a first captain. If he was any good he
would be made a major. I know what a first captain is, doctor.” “He is an excellent
surgeon and I would rather have his judgment than any surgeon I know.” “Could
another surgeon see it?” “Certainly if you wish. But I would take Dr. Varella’s opinion
myself.” “Could you ask another surgeon to come and see it?” “I will ask Valentini to
come.” “Who is he?” “He is a surgeon of the Ospedale Maggiore.” “Good. I
appreciate it very much. You understand, doctor, I couldn’t stay in bed six months.”
“You would not be in bed. You would first take a sun cure. Then you could have light
exercise. Then when it was encysted we would operate.” “But I can’t wait six
months.” The doctor spread his delicate fingers on the cap he held and smiled. “You
are in such a hurry to get back to the front?” “Why not?” “It is very beautiful,” he said.
“You are a noble young man.” He stooped over and kissed me very delicately on the
forehead. “I will send for Valentini. Do not worry and excite yourself. Be a good boy.”
“Will you have a drink?” I asked.

“A Farewell to Arms” By Ernest Hemingway 43

“No thank you. I never drink alcohol.” “Just have one.” I rang for the porter to bring
glasses. “No. No thank you. They are waiting for me.” “Good-by,” I said. “Good-by.”
Two hours later Dr. Valentini came into the room. He was in a great hurry and the
points of his mustache stood straight up. He was a major, his face was tanned and
he laughed all the time. “How did you do it, this rotten thing?” he asked. “Let me see
the plates. Yes. Yes. That’s it. You look healthy as a goat. Who’s the pretty girl? Is
she your girl? I thought so. Isn’t this a bloody war? How does that feel? You are a
fine boy. I’ll make you better than new. Does that hurt? You bet it hurts. How they
love to hurt you, these doctors. What have they done for you so far? Can’t that girl
talk Italian? She should learn. What a lovely girl. I could teach her. I will be a patient
here myself. No, but I will do all your maternity work free. Does she understand that?
She will make you a fine boy. A fine blonde like she is. That’s fine. That’s all right.
What a lovely girl. Ask her if she eats supper with me. No I won’t take her away from
you. Thank you. Thank you very much, Miss. That’s all.” “That’s all I want to know.”
He patted me on the shoulder. “Leave the dressings off.” “Will you have a drink, Dr.
Valentini?” “A drink? Certainly. I will have ten drinks. Where are they?” “In the
armoire. Miss Barkley will get the bottle.” “Cheery oh. Cheery oh to you, Miss. What
a lovely girl. I will bring you better cognac than that.” He wiped his mustache. “When
do you think it can be operated on?” “To-morrow morning. Not before. Your stomach
must be emptied. You must be washed out. I will see the old lady downstairs and
leave instructions. Good-by. I see you to-morrow. I’ll bring you better cognac than
that. You are very comfortable here. Good-by. Until to-morrow. Get a good sleep. I’ll
see you early.” He waved from the doorway, his mustaches went straight up, his
brown face was smiling. There was a star in a box on his sleeve because he was a
major.
16
That night a bat flew into the room through the open door that led onto the balcony
and through which we watched the night over the roofs of the town. It was dark in
our room except for the small light of the night over the town and the bat was not
frightened but hunted in the room as though he had been outside. We lay and
watched him and I do not think he saw us because we lay so still. After he went out
we saw a searchlight come on and watched the beam move across the sky and then
go off and it was dark again. A breeze came in the night and we heard the men of
the anti-aircraft gun on the next roof talking. It was cool and they were putting on
their capes. I worried in the night about some one coming up but Catherine said they
were all asleep. Once in the night we went to sleep and when I woke she was not
there but I heard her coming along the hall and the door opened and she came back
to the bed and said it was all right she had been downstairs and they were all
asleep. She had been outside Miss Van Campen’s door and heard her breathing in
her sleep. She brought crackers and we ate them and drank some vermouth. We
were very hungry but she said that would all have to be gotten out of me in the
morning. I went to sleep again in the morning when it was light and when I was
awake I found she was gone again. She came in looking fresh and lovely and sat on
the bed and the sun rose while I had the thermometer in my mouth and we smelled
the dew on the roofs and then the coffee of the men at the gun on the next roof. “I
wish we could go for a walk,” Catherine said. “I’d wheel you if we had a chair.” “How
would I get into the chair?”
“A Farewell to Arms” By Ernest Hemingway 44

“We’d do it.” “We could go out to the park and have breakfast outdoors.” I looked out
the open doorway. “What we’ll really do,” she said, “is get you ready for your friend
Dr. Valentini.” “I thought he was grand.” “I didn’t like him as much as you did. But I
imagine he’s very good.” “Come back to bed, Catherine. Please,” I said. “I can’t.
Didn’t we have a lovely night?” “And can you be on night duty to-night?” “I probably
will. But you won’t want me.” “Yes, I will.” “No, you won’t. You’ve never been
operated on. You don’t know how you’ll be.” “I’ll be all right.” “You’ll be sick and I
won’t be anything to you.” “Come back then now.” “No,” she said. “I have to do the
chart, darling, and fix you up.” “You don’t really love me or you’d come back again.”
“You’re such a silly boy.” She kissed me. “That’s all right for the chart. Your
temperature’s always normal. You’ve such a lovely temperature.” “You’ve got a
lovely everything.” “Oh no. You have the lovely temperature. I’m awfully proud of
your temperature.” “Maybe all our children will have fine temperatures.” “Our children
will probably have beastly temperatures.” “What do you have to do to get me ready
for Valentini?” “Not much. But quite unpleasant.” “I wish you didn’t have to do it.” “I
don’t. I don’t want any one else to touch you. I’m silly. I get furious if they couch you.”
“Even Ferguson?” “Especially Ferguson and Gage and the other, what’s her name?”
“Walker?” “That’s it. They’ve too many nurses here now. There must be some more
patients or they’ll send us away. They have four nurses now.” “Perhaps there’ll be
some. They need that many nurses. It’s quite a big hospital.” “I hope some will come.
What would I do if they sent me away? They will unless there are more patients.” “I’d
go too.” “Don’t be silly. You can’t go yet. But get well quickly, darling, and we will go
somewhere.” “And then what?” “Maybe the war will be over. It can’t always go on.”
“I’ll get well,” I said. “Valentini will fix me.” “He should with those mustaches. And,
darling, when you’re going under the ether just think about something else—not us.
Because people get very blabby under an anaesthetic.” “What should I think about?”
“Anything. Anything but us. Think about your people. Or even any other girl.” “No.’’
“Say your prayers then. That ought to create a splendid impression.” “Maybe I won’t
talk.” “That’s true. Often people don’t talk.” “I won’t talk.” “Don’t brag, darling. Please
don’t brag. You’re so sweet and you don’t have to brag.” “I won’t talk a word.” “Now
you’re bragging, darling. You know you don’t need to brag. Just start your

“A Farewell to Arms” By Ernest Hemingway 45

prayers or poetry or something when they tell you to breathe deeply. You’ll be lovely
that way and I’ll be so proud of you. I’m very proud of you anyway. You have such a
lovely temperature and you sleep like a little boy with your arm around the pillow and
think it’s me. Or is it some other girl? Some fine Italian girl?” “It’s you.” “Of course it’s
me. Oh I do love you and Valentini will make you a fine leg. I’m glad I don’t have to
watch it.” “And you’ll be on night duty to-night.” “Yes. But you won’t care.” “You wait
and see.” “There, darling. Now you’re all clean inside and out. Tell me. How many
people have you ever loved?” “Nobody.” “Not me even?” “Yes, you.” “How many
others really?” “None.” “How many have you—how do you say it?—stayed with?”
“None.” “You’re lying to me.” “Yes.” “It’s all right. Keep right on lying to me. That’s
what I want you to do. Were they pretty?” “I never stayed with any one.” “That’s right.
Were they very attractive?” “I don’t know anything about it.” “You’re just mine. That’s
true and you’ve never belonged to any one else. But I don’t care if you have. I’m not
afraid of them. But don’t tell me about them. When a man stays with a girl when
does she say how much it costs?” “I don’t know.” “Of course not. Does she say she
loves him? Tell me that. I want to know that.” “Yes. If he wants her to.” “Does he say
he loves her? Tell me please. It’s important.” “He does if he wants to.” “But you
never did? Really?” “No.” “Not really. Tell me the truth.” “No,” I lied. “You wouldn’t,”
she said. “I knew you wouldn’t. Oh, I love you, darling.” Outside the sun was up over
the roofs and I could see the points of the cathedral with the sunlight on them. I was
clean inside and outside and waiting for the doctor. “And that’s it?” Catherine said.
“She says just what he wants her to?” “Not always.” “But I will. I’ll say just what you
wish and I’ll do what you wish and then you will never want any other girls, will you?”
She looked at me very happily. “I’ll do what you want and say what you want and
then I’ll be a great success, won’t I?” “Yes.” “What would you like me to do now that
you’re all ready?” “Come to the bed again.” “All right. I’ll come.” “Oh, darling, darling,
darling,” I said. “You see,” she said. “I do anything you want.” “You’re so lovely.” “I’m
afraid I’m not very good at it yet.” “You’re lovely.”

“A Farewell to Arms” By Ernest Hemingway 46

“I want what you want. There isn’t any me any more. Just what you want.” “You
sweet.” “I’m good. Aren’t I good? You don’t want any other girls, do you?” “No.” “You
see? I’m good. I do what you want.”
17
When I was awake after the operation I had not been away. You do not go away.
They only choke you. It is not like dying it is just a chemical choking so you do not
feel, and afterward you might as well have been drunk except that when you throw
up nothing comes but bile and you do not feel better afterward. I saw sandbags at
the end of the bed. They were on pipes that came out of the cast. After a while I saw
Miss Gage and she said, “How is it now?” “Better,” I said. “He did a wonderful job on
your knee.” “How long did it take?” “Two hours and a half.” “Did I say anything silly?”
“Not a thing. Don’t talk. Just be quiet.” I was sick and Catherine was right. It did not
make any difference who was on night duty. There were three other patients in the
hospital now, a thin boy in the Red Cross from Georgia with malaria, a nice boy, also
thin, from New York, with malaria and jaundice, and a fine boy who had tried to
unscrew the fuse-cap from a combination shrapnel and high explosive shell for a
souvenir. This was a shrapnel shell used by the Austrians in the mountains with a
nose-cap which went on after the burst and exploded on contact. Catherine Barkley
was greatly liked by the nurses because she would do night duty indefinitely. She
had quite a little work with the malaria people, the boy who had unscrewed the nosecap was a friend of ours and never rang at night, unless it was necessary but
between the times of working we were together. I loved her very much and she loved
me. I slept in the daytime and we wrote notes during the day when we were awake
and sent them by Ferguson. Ferguson was a fine girl. I never learned anything about
her except that she had a brother in the Fifty-Second Division and a brother in
Mesopotamia and she was very good to Catherine Barkley. “Will you come to our
wedding, Fergy?” I said to her once. “You’ll never get married.” “We will.” “No you
won’t.” “Why not?” “You’ll fight before you’ll marry.” “We never fight.” “You’ve time
yet.” “We don’t fight.” “You’ll die then. Fight or die. That’s what people do. They don’t
marry.” I reached for her hand. “Don’t take hold of me,” she said. “I’m not crying.
Maybe you’ll be all right you two. But watch out you don’t get her in trouble. You get
her in trouble and I’ll kill you.” “I won’t get her in trouble.” “Well watch out then. I hope
you’ll be all right. You have a good time.” “We have a fine time.” “Don’t fight then and
don’t get her into trouble.” “I won’t.” “Mind you watch out. I don’t want her with any of
these war babies.” “You’re a fine girl, Fergy.”
“A Farewell to Arms” By Ernest Hemingway 47
“I’m not. Don’t try to flatter me. How does your leg feel?” “Fine.” “How is your head?”
She touched the top of it with her fingers. It was sensitive like a foot that had gone to
sleep. “It’s never bothered me.” “A bump like that could make you crazy. It never
bothers you?” “No.” “You’re a lucky young man. Have you the letter done? I’m going
down.” “It’s here,” I said. “You ought to ask her not to do night duty for a while. She’s
getting very tired.” “All right. I will.” “I want to do it but she won’t let me. The others
are glad to let her have it. You might give her just a little rest.” “All right.” “Miss Van
Campen spoke about you sleeping all the forenoons.” “She would.” “It would be
better if you let her stay off nights a little while.” “I want her to.” “You do not. But if
you would make her I’d respect you for it.” “I’ll make her.” “I don’t believe it.” She
took the note and went out. I rang the bell and in a little while Miss Gage came in.
“What’s the matter?” “I just wanted to talk to you. Don’t you think Miss Barkley ought
to go off night duty for a while? She looks awfully tired. Why does she stay on so
long?” Miss Gage looked at me. “I’m a friend of yours,” she said. “You don’t have to
talk to me like that.” “What do you mean?” “Don’t be silly. Was that all you wanted?”
“Do you want a vermouth?” “All right. Then I have to go.” She got out the bottle from
the armoire and brought a glass. “You take the glass,” I said. “I’ll drink out of the
bottle.” “Here’s to you,” said Miss Gage. “What did Van Campen say about me
sleeping late in the mornings?” “She just jawed about it. She calls you our privileged
patient.” “To hell with her.” “She isn’t mean,” Miss Gage said. “She’s just old and
cranky. She never liked you.” “No.” “Well, I do. And I’m your friend. Don’t forget that.”
“You’re awfully damned nice.” “No. I know who you think is nice. But I’m your friend.
How does your leg feel?” “Fine.” “I’ll bring some cold mineral water to pour over it. It
must itch under the cast. It’s hot outside.” “You’re awful nice.” “Does it itch much?”
“No. It’s fine.” “I’ll fix those sandbags better.” She leaned over. “I’m your friend.” “I
know you are.” “No you don’t. But you will some day.” Catherine Barkley took three
nights off night duty and then she came back on again. It was as though we met
again after each of us had been away on a long journey.

“A Farewell to Arms” By Ernest Hemingway 48

18
We had a lovely time that summer. When I could go out we rode in a carriage in the
park. I remember the carriage, the horse going slowly, and up ahead the back of the
driver with his varnished high hat, and Catherine Barkley sitting beside me. If we let
our hands touch, just the side of my hand touching hers, we were excited. Afterward
when I could get around on crutches we went to dinner at Biffi’s or the Gran Italia
and sat at the tables outside on the floor of the galleria. The waiters came in and out
and there were people going by and candles with shades on the tablecloths and
after we decided that we liked the Gran Italia best, George, the headwaiter, saved us
a table. He was a fine waiter and we let him order the meal while we looked at the
people, and the great galleria in the dusk, and each other. We drank dry white capri
iced in a bucket; although we tried many of the other wines, fresa, barbera and the
sweet white wines. They had no wine waiter because of the war and George would
smile ashamedly when I asked about wines like fresa. “If you imagine a country that
makes a wine because it tastes like strawberries,” he said. “Why shouldn’t it?”
Catherine asked. “It sounds splendid.” “You try it, lady,” said George, “if you want to.
But let me bring a little bottle of margaux for the Tenente.” “I’ll try it too, George.”
“Sir, I can’t recommend you to. It doesn’t even taste like strawberries.” “It might,”
said Catherine. “It would be wonderful if it did.” “I’ll bring it,” said George, “and when
the lady is satisfied I’ll take it away.” It was not much of a wine. As he said, it did not
even taste like strawberries. We went back to capri. One evening I was short of
money and George loaned me a hundred lire. “That’s all right, Tenente,” he said. “I
know how it is. I know how a man gets short. If you or the lady need money I’ve
always got money.” After dinner we walked through the galleria, past the other
restaurants and the shops with their steel shutters down, and stopped at the little
place where they sold sandwiches; ham and lettuce sandwiches and anchovy
sandwiches made of very tiny brown glazed rolls and only about as long as your
finger. They were to eat in the night when we were hungry. Then we got into an open
carriage outside the galleria in front of the cathedral and rode to the hospital. At the
door of the hospital the porter came out to help with the crutches. I paid the driver,
and then we rode upstairs in the elevator. Catherine got off at the lower floor where
the nurses lived and I went on up and went down the hall on crutches to my room;
sometimes I undressed and got into bed and sometimes I sat out on the balcony with
my leg up on another chair and watched the swallows over the roofs and waited for
Catherine. When she came upstairs it was as though she had been away on a long
trip and I went along the hall with her on the crutches and carried the basins and
waited outside the doors, or went in with her; it depending on whether they were
friends of ours or not, and when she had done all there was to be done we sat out on
the balcony outside my room. Afterward I went to bed and when they were all asleep
and she was sure they would not call she came in. I loved to take her hair down and
she sat on the bed and kept very still, except suddenly she would dip down to kiss
me while I was doing it, and I would take out the pins and lay them on the sheet and
it would be loose and I would watch her while she kept very still and then take out
the last two pins and it would all come down and she would drop her head and we
would both be inside of it, and it was the feeling of inside a tent or behind a falls. She
had wonderfully beautiful hair and I would lie sometimes and watch her twisting it up
in the light that came in the open door and it shone even in the night as water shines
sometimes just before it is really daylight. She had a lovely face and body and lovely
smooth skin too. We would be lying together and I would touch her cheeks and her
forehead and under her eyes and her chin and throat with the tips of my fingers and
say,
“A Farewell to Arms” By Ernest Hemingway 49

“Smooth as piano keys,” and she would stroke my chin with her finger and say,
“Smooth as emery paper and very hard on piano keys.” “Is it rough?” “No, darling. I
was just making fun of you.” It was lovely in the nights and if we could only touch
each other we were happy. Besides all the big times we had many small ways of
making love and we tried putting thoughts in the other one’s head while we were in
different rooms. It seemed to work sometimes but that was probably because we
were thinking the same thing anyway. We said to each other that we were married
the first day she had come to the hospital and we counted months from our wedding
day. I wanted to be really married but Catherine said that if we were they would send
her away and if we merely started on the formalities they would watch her and would
break us up. We would have to be married under Italian law and the formalities were
terrific. I wanted us to be married really because I worried about having a child if I
thought about it, but we pretended to ourselves we were married and did not worry
much and I suppose I enjoyed not being married, really. I know one night we talked
about it and Catherine said, “But, darling, they’d send me away.” “Maybe they
wouldn’t.” “They would. They’d send me home and then we would he apart until after
the war.” “I’d come on leave.” “You couldn’t get to Scotland and back on a leave.
Besides, I won’t leave you. What good would it do to marry now? We’re really
married. I couldn’t be any more married.” “I only wanted to for you.” “There isn’t any
me. I’m you. Don’t make up a separate me.” “I thought girls always wanted to be
married.” “They do. But, darling, I am married. I’m married to you. Don’t I make you a
good wife?” “You’re a lovely wife.” “You see, darling, I had one experience of waiting
to be married.” “I don’t want to hear about it.” “You know I don’t love any one but
you. You shouldn’t mind because some one else loved me.” “I do.” “You shouldn’t be
jealous of some one who’s dead when you have everything.” “No, but I don’t want to
hear about it.” “Poor darling. And I know you’ve been with all kinds of girls and it
doesn’t matter to me.” “Couldn’t we be married privately some way? Then if anything
happened to me or if you had a child.” “There’s no way to be married except by
church or state. We are married privately. You see, darling, it would mean everything
to me if I had any religion. But I haven’t any religion.” “You gave me the Saint
Anthony.” “That was for luck. Some one gave it to me.” “Then nothing worries you?”
“Only being sent away from you. You’re my religion. You’re all I’ve got.” “All right. But
I’ll marry you the day you say.” “Don’t talk as though you had to make an honest
woman of me, darling. I’m a very honest woman. You can’t be ashamed of
something if you’re only happy and proud of it. Aren’t you happy?” “But you won’t
ever leave me for some one else.” “No, darling. I won’t ever leave you for some one
else. I suppose all sorts of dreadful things will happen to us. But you don’t have to
worry about that.” “I don’t. But I love you so much and you did love some one else
before.” “And what happened to him?”

“A Farewell to Arms” By Ernest Hemingway 50

“He died.” “Yes and if he hadn’t I wouldn’t have met you. I’m not unfaithful, darling.
I’ve plenty of faults but I’m very faithful. You’ll be sick of me I’ll be so faithful.” “I’ll
have to go back to the front pretty soon.” “We won’t think about that until you go. You
see I’m happy, darling, and we have a lovely time. I haven’t been happy for a long
time and when I met you perhaps I was nearly crazy. Perhaps I was crazy. But now
we’re happy and we love each other. Do let’s please just be happy. You are happy,
aren’t you? Is there anything I do you don’t like? Can I do anything to please you?
Would you like me to take down my hair? Do you want to play?” “Yes and come to
bed.” “All right. I’ll go and see the patients first.”
19
The summer went that way. I do not remember much about the days, except that
they were hot and that there were many victories in the papers. I was very healthy
and my legs healed quickly so that it was not very long after I was first on crutches
before I was through with them and walking with a cane. Then I started treatments at
the Ospedale Maggiore for bending the knees, mechanical treatments, baking in a
box of mirrors with violet rays, massage, and baths. I went over there afternoons and
afterward stopped at the café and had a drink and read the papers. I did not roam
around the town; but wanted to get home to the hospital from the café. All I wanted
was to see Catherine. The rest of the time I was glad to kill. Mostly I slept in the
mornings, and in the afternoons, sometimes, I went to the races, and late to the
mechanotherapy treatments. Sometimes I stopped in at the AngloAmerican Club
and sat in a deep leather-cushioned chair in front of the window and read the
magazines. They would not let us go out together when I was off crutches because it
was unseemly for a nurse to be seen unchaperoned with a patient who did not look
as though he needed attendance, so we were not together much in the afternoons.
Although sometimes we could go out to dinner if Ferguson went along. Miss Van
Campen had accepted the status that we were great friends because she got a great
amount of work out of Catherine. She thought Catherine came from very good
people and that prejudiced her in her favor finally. Miss Van Campen admired family
very much and came from an excellent family herself. The hospital was quite busy,
too, and that kept her occupied. It was a hot summer and I knew many people in
Milan but always was anxious to get back home to the hospital as soon as the
afternoon was over. At the front they were advancing on the Carso, they had taken
Kuk across from Plava and were taking the Bainsizza plateau. The West front did not
sound so good. It looked as though the war were going on for a long time. We were
in the war now but I thought it would take a year to get any great amount of troops
over and train them for combat. Next year would be a bad year, or a good year
maybe. The Italians were using up an awful amount of men. I did not see how it
could go on. Even if they took all the Bainsizza and Monte San Gabriele there were
plenty of mountains beyond for the Austrians. I had seen them. All the highest
mountains were beyond. On the Carso they were going forward but there were
marshes and swamps down by the sea. Napoleon would have whipped the
Austrians on the plains. He never would have fought them in the mountains. He
would have let them come down and whipped them around Verona. Still nobody was
whipping any one on the Western front. Perhaps wars weren’t won any more. Maybe
they went on forever. Maybe it was another Hundred Years’ War. I put the paper
back on the rack and left the club. I went down the steps carefully and walked up the
Via Manzoni. Outside the Gran Hotel I met old Meyers and his wife getting out of a
carriage. They were coming back from the races. She was a big-busted woman in
black satin. He was short and old, with a white mustache and walked flat-footed with
a cane. “How do you do? How do you do?” She shook hands. “Hello,” said Meyers.
“A Farewell to Arms” By Ernest Hemingway 51

“How were the races?” “Fine. They were just lovely. I had three winners.” “How did
you do?” I asked Meyers. “All right. I had a winner.” “I never know how he does,”
Mrs. Meyers said. “He never tells me.” “I do all right,” Meyers said. He was being
cordial. “You ought to come out.” While he talked you had the impression that he
was not looking at you or that he mistook you for some one else. “I will,” I said. “I’m
coming up to the hospital to see you,” Mrs. Meyers said. “I have some things for my
boys. You’re all my boys. You certainly are my dear boys.” “They’ll be glad to see
you.” “Those dear boys. You too. You’re one of my boys.” “I have to get back,” I said.
“You give my love to all those dear boys. I’ve got lots of things to bring. I’ve some
fine marsala and cakes.” “Good-by,” I said. “They’ll be awfully glad to see you.”
“Good-by,” said Meyers. “You come around to the galleria. You know where my table
is. We’re all there every afternoon.” I went on up the street. I wanted to buy
something at the Cova to take to Catherine. Inside, at the Cova, I bought a box of
chocolate and while the girl wrapped it up I walked over to the bar. There were a
couple of British and some aviators. I had a martini alone, paid for it, picked up the
box of chocolate at the outside counter and walked on home toward the hospital.
Outside the little bar up the street from the Scala there were some people I knew, a
vice-consul, two fellows who studied singing, and Ettore Moretti, an Italian from San
Francisco who was in the Italian army. I had a drink with them. One of the singers
was named Ralph Simmons, and he was singing under the name of Enrico
DelCredo. I never knew how well he could sing but he was always on the point of
something very big happening. He was fat and looked shopworn around the nose
and mouth as though he had hayfever. He had come back from singing in Piacenza.
He had sung Tosca and it had been wonderful. “Of course you’ve never heard me
sing,” he said. “When will you sing here?” “I’ll be at the Scala in the fall.” “I’ll bet they
throw the benches at you,” Ettore said. “Did you hear how they threw the benches at
him in Modena?” “It’s a damned lie.” “They threw the benches at him,” Ettore said. “I
was there. I threw six benches myself.” “You’re just a wop from Frisco.” “He can’t
pronounce Italian,” Ettore said. “Everywhere he goes they throw the benches at
him.” “Piacenza’s the toughest house to sing in the north of Italy,” the other tenor
said. “Believe me that’s a tough little house to sing.” This tenor’s name was Edgar
Saunders, and he sang under the name of Edouardo Giovanni. “I’d like to be there to
see them throw the benches at you.” Ettore said. “You can’t sing Italian.” “He’s a
nut,” said Edgar Saunders. “All he knows how to say is throw benches.” “That’s all
they know how to do when you two sing,” Ettore said. “Then when you go to America
you’ll tell about your triumphs at the Scala. They wouldn’t let you get by the first note
at the Scala.” “I’ll sing at the Scala,” Simmons said. “I’m going to sing Tosca in
October.” “We’ll go, won’t we, Mac?” Ettore said to the vice-consul. “They’ll need
somebody to protect them.” “Maybe the American army will be there to protect
them,” the vice-consul said. “Do you want another drink, Simmons? You want a
drink, Saunders?”

“A Farewell to Arms” By Ernest Hemingway 52

“All right,” said Saunders. “I hear you’re going to get the silver medal,” Ettore said to
me. “What kind of citation you going to get?” “I don’t know. I don’t know I’m going to
get it.” “You’re going to get it. Oh boy, the girls at the Cova will think you’re fine then.
They’ll all think you killed two hundred Austrians or captured a whole trench by
yourself. Believe me, I got to work for my decorations.” “How many have you got,
Ettore?” asked the vice-consul. “He’s got everything,” Simmons said. “He’s the boy
they’re running the war for.” “I’ve got the bronze twice and three silver medals,” said
Ettore. “But the papers on only one have come through.” “What’s the matter with the
others?” asked Simmons. “The action wasn’t successful,” said Ettore. “When the
action isn’t successful they hold up all the medals.” “How many times have you been
wounded, Ettore?” “Three times bad. I got three wound stripes. See?” He pulled his
sleeve around. The stripes were parallel silver lines on a black background sewed to
the cloth of the sleeve about eight inches below the shoulder. “You got one too,”
Ettore said to me. “Believe me they’re fine to have. I’d rather have them than
medals. Believe me, boy, when you get three you’ve got something. You only get
one for a wound that puts you three months in the hospital.” “Where were you
wounded, Ettore?” asked the vice-consul. Ettore pulled up his sleeve. “Here,” he
showed the deep smooth red scar. “Here on my leg. I can’t show you that because I
got puttees on; and in the foot. There’s dead bone in my foot that stinks right now.
Every morning I take new little pieces out and it stinks all the time.” “What hit you?”
asked Simmons. “A hand-grenade. One of those potato mashers. It just blew the
whole side of my foot off. You know those potato mashers?” He turned to me.
“Sure.” “I saw the son of a bitch throw it,” Ettore said. “It knocked me down and I
thought I was dead all right but those damn potato mashers haven’t got anything in
them. I shot the son of a bitch with my rifle. I always carry a rifle so they can’t tell I’m
an officer.” “How did he look?” asked Simmons. “That was the only one he had,”
Ettore said. “I don’t know why he threw it. I guess he always wanted to throw one.
He never saw any real fighting probably. I shot the son of a bitch all right.” “How did
he look when you shot him?” Simmons asked. “Hell, how should I know?” said
Ettore. “I shot him in the belly. I was afraid I’d miss him if I shot him in the head.”
“How long have you been an officer, Ettore?” I asked. “Two years. I’m going to be a
captain. How long have you been a lieutenant?” “Going on three years.” “You can’t
be a captain because you don’t know the Italian language well enough,” Ettore said.
“You can talk but you can’t read and write well enough. You got to have an
education to be a captain. Why don’t you go in the American army?” “Maybe I will.” “I
wish to God I could. Oh, boy, how much does a captain get, Mac?” “I don’t know
exactly. Around two hundred and fifty dollars, I think.” “Jesus Christ what I could do
with two hundred and fifty dollars. You better get in the American army quick, Fred.
See if you can’t get me in.” “All right.” “I can command a company in Italian. I could
learn it in English easy.” “You’d be a general,” said Simmons. “No, I don’t know
enough to be a general. A general’s got to know a hell of a lot. You

“A Farewell to Arms” By Ernest Hemingway 53

guys think there ain’t anything to war. You ain’t got brains enough to be a secondclass corporal.” “Thank God I don’t have to be,” Simmons said. “Maybe you will if
they round up all you slackers. Oh, boy, I’d like to have you two in my platoon. Mac
too. I’d make you my orderly, Mac.” “You’re a great boy, Ettore,” Mac said. “But I’m
afraid you’re a militarist.” “I’ll be a colonel before the war’s over,” Ettore said. “If they
don’t kill you.” “They won’t kill me.” He touched the stars at his collar with his thumb
and forefinger. “See me do that? We always touch our stars if anybody mentions
getting killed.” “Let’s go, Sim,” said Saunders standing up. “All right.” “So long,” I
said. “I have to go too.” It was a quarter to six by the clock inside the bar. “Ciaou,
Ettore.” “Ciaou, Fred,” said Ettore. “That’s pretty fine you’re going to get the silver
medal.” “I don’t know I’ll get it.” “You’ll get it all right, Fred. I heard you were going to
get it all right.” “Well, so long,” I said. “Keep out of trouble, Ettore.” “Don’t worry about
me. I don’t drink and I don’t run around. I’m no boozer and whorehound. I know
what’s good for me.” “So long,” I said. “I’m glad you’re going to be promoted
captain.” “I don’t have to wait to be promoted. I’m going to be a captain for merit of
war. You know. Three stars with the crossed swords and crown above. That’s me.”
“Good luck.” “Good luck. When you going back to the front?” “Pretty soon.” “Well, I’ll
see you around.” “So long.” “So long. Don’t take any bad nickels.” I walked on down
a back Street that led to a cross-cut to the hospital. Ettore was twenty-three. He had
been brought up by an uncle in San Francisco and was visiting his father and mother
in Torino when war was declared. He had a sister, who had been sent to America
with him at the same time to live with the uncle, who would graduate from normal
school this year. He was a legitimate hero who bored every one he met. Catherine
could not stand him. “We have heroes too,” she said. “But usually, darling, they’re
much quieter.” “I don’t mind him.” “I wouldn’t mind him if he wasn’t so conceited and
didn’t bore me, and bore me, and bore me.” “He bores me.” “You’re sweet to say so,
darling. But you don’t need to. You can picture him at the front and you know he’s
useful but he’s so much the type of boy I don’t care for.” “I know.” “You’re awfully
sweet to know, and I try and like him but he’s a dreadful, dreadful boy really.” “He
said this afternoon he was going to be a captain.” “I’m glad,” said Catherine. “That
should please him.” “Wouldn’t you like me to have some more exalted rank?” “No,
darling. I only want you to have enough rank so that we’re admitted to the better
restaurants.” “That’s just the rank I have.” “You have a splendid rank. I don’t want
you to have any more rank. It might go to your head. Oh, darling, I’m awfully glad
you’re not conceited. I’d have married you even if you were conceited but it’s very
restful to have a husband who’s not conceited.” We were talking softly out on the
balcony. The moon was supposed to rise but there

“A Farewell to Arms” By Ernest Hemingway 54

was a mist over the town and it did not come up and in a little while it started to
drizzle and we came in. Outside the mist turned to rain and in a little while it was
raining hard and we heard it drumming on the roof. I got up and stood at the door to
see if it was raining in but it wasn’t, so I left the door open. “Who else did you see?”
Catherine asked. “Mr. and Mrs. Meyers.” “They’re a strange lot.” “He’s supposed to
have been in the penitentiary at home. They let him out to die.” “And he lived happily
in Milan forever after.” “I don’t know how happily.” “Happily enough after jail I should
think.” “She’s bringing some things here.” “She brings splendid things. Were you her
dear boy?” “One of them.” “You are all her dear boys,” Catherine said. “She prefers
the dear boys. Listen to it rain.” “It’s raining hard.” “And you’ll always love me, won’t
you?” “Yes.” “And the rain won’t make any difference?” “No.” “That’s good. Because
I’m afraid of the rain.” “Why?” I was sleepy. Outside the rain was falling steadily. “I
don’t know, darling. I’ve always been afraid of the rain.” “I like it.” “I like to walk in it.
But it’s very hard on loving.” “I’ll love you always.” “I’ll love you in the rain and in the
snow and in the hail and— what else is there?” “I don’t know. I guess I’m sleepy.”
“Go to sleep, darling, and I’ll love you no matter how it is.” “You’re not really afraid of
the rain are you?” “Not when I’m with you.” “Why are you afraid of it?” “I don’t know.”
“Tell me.” “Don’t make me.” “Tell me.” “No.” “Tell me.” “All right. I’m afraid of the rain
because sometimes I see me dead in it.” “No.” “And sometimes I see you dead in it.”
“That’s more likely.” “No, it’s not, darling. Because I can keep you safe. I know I can.
But nobody can help themselves.” “Please stop it. I don’t want you to get Scotch and
crazy tonight. We won’t be together much longer.” “No, but I am Scotch and crazy.
But I’ll stop it. It’s all nonsense.” “Yes it’s all nonsense.” “It’s all nonsense. It’s only
nonsense. I’m not afraid of the rain. I’m not afraid of the rain. Oh, oh, God, I wish I
wasn’t.” She was crying. I comforted her and she stopped crying. But outside it kept
on raining.

“A Farewell to Arms” By Ernest Hemingway 55

20
One day in the afternoon we went to the races. Ferguson went too and Crowell
Rodgers, the boy who had been wounded in the eyes by the explosion of the shell
nose-cap. The girls dressed to go after lunch while Crowell and I sat on the bed in
his room and read the past performances of the horses and the predictions in the
racing paper. Crowell’s head was bandaged and he did not care much about these
races but read the racing paper constantly and kept track of all the horses for
something to do. He said the horses were a terrible lot but they were all the horses
we had. Old Meyers liked him and gave him tips. Meyers won on nearly every race
but disliked to give tips because it brought down the prices. The racing was very
crooked. Men who had been ruled off the turf everywhere else were racing in Italy.
Meyers’ information was good but I hated to ask him because sometimes he did not
answer, and always you could see it hurt him to tell you, but he felt obligated to tell
us for some reason and he hated less to tell Crowell. Crowell’s eyes had been hurt,
one was hurt badly, and Meyers had trouble with his eyes and so he liked Crowell.
Meyers never told his wife what horses he was playing and she won or lost, mostly
lost, and talked all the time. We four drove out to San Siro in an open carriage. It
was a lovely day and we drove out through the park and out along the tramway and
out of town where the road was dusty. There were villas with iron fences and big
overgrown gardens and ditches with water flowing and green vegetable gardens with
dust on the leaves. We could look across the plain and see farmhouses and the rich
green farms with their irrigation ditches and the mountains to the north. There were
many carriages going into the race track and the men at the gate let us in without
cards because we were in uniform. We left the carriage, bought programmes, and
walked across the infield and then across the smooth thick turf of the course to the
paddock. The grand-stands were old and made of wood and the betting booths were
under the stands and in a row out near the stables. There was a crowd of soldiers
along the fence in the infield. The paddock was fairly well filled with people and they
were walking the horses around in a ring under the trees behind the grandstand. We
saw people we knew and got chairs for Ferguson and Catherine and watched the
horses. They went around, one after the other, their heads down, the grooms leading
them. One horse, a purplish black, Crowell swore was dyed that color. We watched
him and it seemed possible. He had only come out just before the bell rang to
saddle. We looked him up in the programme from the number on the groom’s arm
and it was listed a black gelding named Japalac. The race was for horses that had
never won a race worth one thousand lire or more. Catherine was sure his color had
been changed. Ferguson said she could not tell. I thought he looked suspicious. We
all agreed we ought to back him and pooled one hundred lire. The odds sheets
showed he would pay thirty-five to one. Crowell went over and bought the tickets
while we watched the jockeys ride around once more and then go out under the
trees to the track and gallop slowly up to the turn where the start was to be. We went
up in the grand-stand to watch the race. They had no elastic barrier at San Siro then
and the starter lined up all the horses, they looked very small way up the track, and
then sent them off with a crack of his long whip. They came past us with the black
horse well in front and on the turn he was running away from the others. I watched
them on the far side with the glasses and saw the jockey fighting to hold him in but
he could not hold him and when they came around the turn and into the stretch the
black horse was fifteen lengths ahead of the others. He went way on up and around
the turn after the finish. “Isn’t it wonderful,” Catherine said. “We’ll have over three
thousand lire. He must be a splendid horse.” “I hope his color doesn’t run,” Crowell
said, “before they pay off.” “He was really a lovely horse,” Catherine said. “I wonder if
Mr. Meyers backed him.” “Did you have the winner?” I called to Meyers. He nodded.
“A Farewell to Arms” By Ernest Hemingway 56
“I didn’t,” Mrs. Meyers said. “Who did you children bet on?” “Japalac.” “Really? He’s
thirty-five to one!” “We liked his color.” “I didn’t. I thought he looked seedy. They told
me not to back him.” “He won’t pay much,” Meyers said. “He’s marked thirty-five to
one in the quotes,” I said. “He won’t pay much. At the last minute,” Meyers said,
“they put a lot of money on him.” “No.” “Kempton and the boys. You’ll see. He won’t
pay two to one.” “Then we won’t get three thousand lire,” Catherine said. “I don’t like
this crooked racing!” “We’ll get two hundred lire.” “That’s nothing. That doesn’t do us
any good. I thought we were going to get three thousand.” “It’s crooked and
disgusting,” Ferguson said. “Of course,” said Catherine, “if it hadn’t been crooked
we’d never have backed him at all. But I would have liked the three thousand lire.”
“Let’s go down and get a drink and see what they pay,” Crowell said. We went out to
where they posted the numbers and the bell rang to pay off and they put up 18.50
after Japalac to win. That meant he paid less than even money on a ten-lira bet. We
went to the bar under the grand-stand and had a whiskey and soda apiece. We ran
into a couple of Italians we knew and McAdams, the vice-consul, and they came up
with us when we joined the girls. The Italians were full of manners and McAdams
talked to Catherine while we went down to bet again. Mr. Meyers was standing near
the pari-mutuel. “Ask him what he played,” I said to Crowell. “What are you on, Mr.
Meyers?” Crowell asked. Meyers took out his programme and pointed to the number
five with his pencil. “Do you mind if we play him too?” Crowell asked. “Go ahead. Go
ahead. But don’t tell my wife I gave it to you.” “Will you have a drink?” I asked. “No
thanks. I never drink.” We put a hundred lire on number five to win and a hundred to
place and then had another whiskey and soda apiece. I was feeling very good and
we picked up a couple more Italians, who each had a drink with us, and went back to
the girls. These Italians were also very mannered and matched manners with the
two we had collected before. In a little while no one could sit down. I gave the tickets
to Catherine. “What horse is it?” “I don’t know. Mr. Meyers’ choice.” “Don’t you even
know the name?” “No. You can find it on the programme. Number five I think.” “You
have touching faith,” she said. The number five won but did not pay anything. Mr.
Meyers was angry. “You have to put up two hundred lire to make twenty,” he said.
“Twelve lire for ten. It’s not worth it. My wife lost twenty lire.” “I’ll go down with you,”
Catherine said to me. The Italians all stood up. We went downstairs and out to the
paddock. “Do you like this?” Catherine asked. “Yes. I guess I do.” “It’s all right, I
suppose,” she said. “But, darling, I can’t stand to see so many people.” “We don’t
see many.” “No. But those Meyers and the man from the bank with his wife and
daughters—” “He cashes my sight drafts,” I said.

“A Farewell to Arms” By Ernest Hemingway 57

“Yes but some one else would if he didn’t. Those last four boys were awful.” “We can
stay out here and watch the race from the fence.” “That will be lovely. And, darling,
let’s back a horse we’ve never heard of and that Mr. Meyers won’t be backing.” “All
right.” We backed a horse named Light For Me that finished fourth in a field of five.
We leaned on the fence and watched the horses go by, their hoofs thudding as they
went past, and saw the mountains off in the distance and Milan beyond the trees and
the fields. “I feel so much cleaner,” Catherine said. The horses were coming back,
through the gate, wet and sweating, the jockeys quieting them and riding up to
dismount under the trees. “Wouldn’t you like a drink? We could have one out here
and see the horses.” “I’ll get them,” I said. “The boy will bring them,” Catherine said.
She put her hand up and the boy came out from the Pagoda bar beside the stables.
We sat down at a round iron table. “Don’t you like it better when we’re alone?” “Yes,”
I said. “I felt very lonely when they were all there.” “It’s grand here,” I said. “Yes. It’s
really a pretty course.” “It’s nice.” “Don’t let me spoil your fun, darling. I’ll go back
whenever you want.” “No,” I said. “We’ll stay here and have our drink. Then we’ll go
down and stand at the water jump for the steeplechase.” “You’re awfully good to
me,” she said. After we had been alone awhile we were glad to see the others again.
We had a good time.
21
In September the first cool nights came, then the days were cool and the leaves on
the trees in the park began to turn color and we knew the summer was gone. The
fighting at the front went very badly and they could not take San Gabriele. The
fighting on the Bainsizza plateau was over and by the middle of the month the
fighting for San Gabriele was about over too. They could not take it. Ettore was gone
back to the front. The horses were gone to Rome and there was no more racing.
Crowell had gone to Rome too, to be sent back to America. There were riots twice in
the town against the war and bad rioting in Turin. A British major at the club told me
the Italians had lost one hundred and fifty thousand men on the Bainsizza plateau
and on San Gabriele. He said they had lost forty thousand on the Carso besides. We
had a drink and he talked. He said the fighting was over for the year down here and
that the Italians had bitten off more than they could chew. He said the offensive in
Flanders was going to the bad. If they killed men as they did this fall the Allies would
be cooked in another year. He said we were all cooked but we were all right as long
as we did not know it. We were all cooked. The thing was not to recognize it. The
last country to realize they were cooked would win the war. We had another drink.
Was I on somebody’s staff? No. He was. It was all balls. We were alone in the club
sitting back in one of the big leather sofas. His boots were smoothly polished dull
leather. They were beautiful boots. He said it was all balls. They thought only in
divisions and man-power. They all squabbled about divisions and only killed them
when they got them. They were all cooked. The Germans won the victories. By God
they were soldiers. The old Hun was a soldier. But they were cooked too. We were
all cooked. I asked about Russia. He said they were cooked already. I’d soon see
they were cooked. Then the Austrians were cooked too. If they got some Hun
divisions they could do it. Did he think they would attack this fall? Of course they
would.
“A Farewell to Arms” By Ernest Hemingway 58
The Italians were cooked. Everybody knew they were cooked. The old Hun would
come down through the Trentino and cut the railway at Vicenza and then where
would the Italians be? They tried that in ‘sixteen, I said. Not with Germans. Yes, I
said. But they probably wouldn’t do that, he said. It was too simple. They’d try
something complicated and get royally cooked. I had to go, I said. I had to get back
to the hospital. “Good-by,” he said. Then cheerily, “Every sort of luck!” There was a
great contrast between his world pessimism and personal cheeriness. I stopped at a
barber shop and was shaved and went home to the hospital. My leg was as well as it
would get for a long time. I had been up for examination three days before. There
were still some treatments to take before my course at the Ospedale. Maggiore was
finished and I walked along the side street practising not limping. An old man was
cutting silhouettes under an arcade. I stopped to watch him. Two girls were posing
and he cut their silhouettes together, snipping very fast and looking at them, his
head on one side. The girls were giggling. He showed me the silhouettes before he
pasted them on white paper and handed them to the girls. “They’re beautiful,” he
said. “How about you, Tenente?” The girls went away looking at their silhouettes and
laughing. They were nice-looking girls. One of them worked in the wine shop across
from the hospital. “All right,” I said. “Take your cap off.” “No. With it on.” “It will not be
so beautiful,” the old man said. “But,” he brightened, “it will be more military.” He
snipped away at the black paper, then separated the two thicknesses and pasted the
profiles on a card and handed them to me. “How much?” “That’s all right.” He waved
his hand. “I just made them for you.” “Please.” I brought out some coppers. “For
pleasure.” “No. I did them for a pleasure. Give them to your girl.” “Many thanks until
we meet.” “Until I see thee.” I went on to the hospital. There were some letters, an
official one, and some others. I was to have three weeks’ convalescent leave and
then return to the front. I read it over carefully. Well, that was that. The convalescent
leave started October fourth when my course was finished. Three weeks was
twenty-one days. That made October twenty-fifth. I told them I would not be in and
went to the restaurant a little way up the street from the hospital for supper and read
my letters and the Corriere Della Sera at the table. There was a letter from my
grandfather, containing family news, patriotic encouragement, a draft for two
hundred dollars, and a few clippings; a dull letter from the priest at our mess, a letter
from a man I knew who was flying with the French and had gotten in with a wild gang
and was telling about it, and a note from Rinaldi asking me how long I was going to
skulk in Milano and what was all the news? He wanted me to bring him phonograph
records and enclosed a list. I drank a small bottle of chianti with the meal, had a
coffee afterward with a glass of cognac, finished the paper, put my letters in my
pocket, left the paper on the table with the tip and went out. In my room at the
hospital I undressed, put on pajamas and a dressing-gown, pulled down the curtains
on the door that opened onto the balcony and sitting up in bed read Boston papers
from a pile Mrs. Meyers had left for her boys at the hospital. The Chicago White Sox
were winning the American League pennant and the New York Giants were leading
the National League. Babe Ruth was a pitcher then playing for Boston. The papers
were dull, the news was local and stale, and the war news was all old. The American
news was all training camps. I was glad I wasn’t in a training camp. The baseball
news was all I could read and I did not have the slightest interest in it. A number of
papers together made it impossible to read with interest. It was not very timely but I
read at it for a while. I wondered if America really got into the war, if they would close
down the major

“A Farewell to Arms” By Ernest Hemingway 59

leagues. They probably wouldn’t. There was still racing in Milan and the war could
not be much worse. They had stopped racing in France. That was where our horse
Japalac came from. Catherine was not due on duty until nine o’clock. I heard her
passing along the floor when she first came on duty and once saw her pass in the
hall. She went to several other rooms and finally came into mine. “I’m late, darling,”
she said. “There was a lot to do. How are you?” I told her about my papers and the
leave. “That’s lovely,” she said. “Where do you want to go?” “Nowhere. I want to stay
here.” “That’s silly. You pick a place to go and I’ll come too.” “How will you work it?”
“I don’t know. But I will.” “You’re pretty wonderful.” “No I’m not. But life isn’t hard to
manage when you’ve nothing to lose.” “How do you mean?” “Nothing. I was only
thinking how small obstacles seemed that once were so big.” “I should think it might
be hard to manage.” “No it won’t, darling. If necessary I’ll simply leave. But it won’t
come to that.” “Where should we go?” “I don’t care. Anywhere you want. Anywhere
we don’t know people.” “Don’t you care where we go?” “No. I’ll like any place.” She
seemed upset and taut. “What’s the matter, Catherine?” “Nothing. Nothing’s the
matter.” “Yes there is.” “No nothing. Really nothing.” “I know there is. Tell me,
darling. You can tell me.” “It’s nothing.” “Tell me.” “I don’t want to. I’m afraid I’ll make
you unhappy or worry you.” “No it won’t.” “You’re sure? It doesn’t worry me but I’m
afraid to worry you.” “It won’t if it doesn’t worry you.” “I don’t want to tell.” “Tell it.” “Do
I have to?” “Yes.” “I’m going to have a baby, darling. It’s almost three months along.
You’re not worried, are you? Please please don’t. You mustn’t worry.” “All right.” “Is it
all right?” “Of course.” “I did everything. I took everything but it didn’t make any
difference.” “I’m not worried.” “I couldn’t help it, darling, and I haven’t worried about
it. You mustn’t worry or feel badly.” “I only worry about you.” “That’s it. That’s what
you mustn’t do. People have babies all the time. Everybody has babies. It’s a natural
thing.” “You’re pretty wonderful.” “No I’m not. But you mustn’t mind, darling. I’ll try
and not make trouble for you. I know I’ve made trouble now. But haven’t I been a
good girl until now? You never knew it, did you?” “No.”

“A Farewell to Arms” By Ernest Hemingway 60

“It will all be like that. You simply mustn’t worry. I can see you’re worrying. Stop it.
Stop it right away. Wouldn’t you like a drink, darling? I know a drink always makes
you feel cheerful.” “No. I feel cheerful. And you’re pretty wonderful.” “No I’m not. But
I’ll fix everything to be together if you pick out a place for us to go. It ought to be
lovely in October. We’ll have a lovely time, darling, and I’ll write you every day while
you’re at the front.” “Where will you be?” “I don’t know yet. But somewhere splendid.
I’ll look after all that.” We were quiet awhile and did not talk. Catherine was sitting on
the bed and I was looking at her but we did not touch each other. We were apart as
when some one comes into a room and people are self-conscious. She put out her
hand and took mine. “You aren’t angry are you, darling?” “No.” “And you don’t feel
trapped?” “Maybe a little. But not by you.” “I didn’t mean by me. You mustn’t be
stupid. I meant trapped at all.” “You always feel trapped biologically.” She went away
a long way without stirring or removing her hand. “‘Always’ isn’t a pretty word.” “I’m
sorry.” “It’s all right. But you see I’ve never had a baby and I’ve never even loved any
one. And I’ve tried to be the way you wanted and then you talk about ‘always.” “I
could cut off my tongue,” I offered. “Oh, darling!” she came back from wherever she
had been. “You mustn’t mind me.” We were both together again and the selfconsciousness was gone. “We really are the same one and we mustn’t
misunderstand on purpose.” “We won’t.” “But people do. They love each other and
they misunderstand on purpose and they fight and then suddenly they aren’t the
same one.” “We won’t fight.” “We mustn’t. Because there’s only us two and in the
world there’s all the rest of them. If anything comes between us we’re gone and then
they have us.” “They won’t get us,” I said. “Because you’re too brave. Nothing ever
happens to the brave.” “They die of course.” “But only once.” “I don’t know. Who said
that?” “The coward dies a thousand deaths, the brave but one?” “Of course. Who
said it?” “I don’t know.” “He was probably a coward,” she said. “He knew a great deal
about cowards but nothing about the brave. The brave dies perhaps two thousand
deaths if he’s intelligent. He simply doesn’t mention them.” “I don’t know. It’s hard to
see inside the head of the brave.” “Yes. That’s how they keep that way.” “You’re an
authority.” “You’re right, darling. That was deserved.” “You’re brave.” “No,” she said.
“But I would like to be.” “I’m not,” I said. “I know where I stand. I’ve been out long
enough to know. I’m like a ball-player that bats two hundred and thirty and knows
he’s no better.” “What is a ball-player that bats two hundred and thirty? It’s awfully
impressive.” “It’s not. It means a mediocre hitter in baseball.” “But still a hitter,” she
prodded me.

“A Farewell to Arms” By Ernest Hemingway 61

“I guess we’re both conceited,” I said. “But you are brave.” “No. But I hope to be.”
“We’re both brave,” I said. “And I’m very brave when I’ve had a drink.” “We’re
splendid people,” Catherine said. She went over to the armoire and brought me the
cognac and a glass. “Have a drink, darling,” she said. “You’ve been awfully good.” “I
don’t really want one.” “Take one.” “All right.” I poured the water glass a third full of
cognac and drank it off. “That was very big,” she said. “I know brandy is for heroes.
But you shouldn’t exaggerate.” “Where will we live after the war?” “In an old people’s
home probably,” she said. “For three years I looked forward very childishly to the war
ending at Christmas. But now I look forward till when our son will be a lieutenant
commander.” “Maybe he’ll be a general.” “If it’s an hundred years’ war he’ll have time
to try both of the services.” “Don’t you want a drink?” “No. It always makes you
happy, darling, and it only makes me dizzy.” “Didn’t you ever drink brandy?” “No,
darling. I’m a very old-fashioned wife.” I reached down to the floor for the bottle and
poured another drink. “I’d better go to have a look at your compatriots,” Catherine
said. “Perhaps you’ll read the papers until I come back.” “Do you have to go?” “Now
or later.” “All right. Now.” “I’ll come back later.” “I’ll have finished the papers,” I said.
22
It turned cold that night and the next day it was raining. Coming home from the
Ospedale Maggiore it rained very hard and I was wet when I came in. Up in my room
the rain was coming down heavily outside on the balcony, and the wind blew it
against the glass doors. I changed my clothing and drank some brandy but the
brandy did not taste good. I felt sick in the night and in the morning after breakfast I
was nauseated. “There is no doubt about it,” the house surgeon said. “Look at the
whites of his eyes, Miss.” Miss Gage looked. They had me look in a glass. The
whites of the eyes were yellow and it was the jaundice. I was sick for two weeks with
it. For that reason we did not spend a convalescent leave together. We had planned
to go to Pallanza on Lago Maggiore. It is nice there in the fall when the leaves turn.
There are walks you can take and you can troll for trout in the lake. It would have
been better than Stresa because there are fewer people at Pallanza. Stresa is so
easy to get to from Milan that there are always people you know. There is a nice
village at Pallanza and you can row out to the islands where the fishermen live and
there is a restaurant on the biggest island. But we did not go. One day while I was in
bed with jaundice Miss Van Campen came in the room, opened the door into the
armoire and saw the empty bottles there. I had sent a load of them down by the
porter and I believe she must have seen them going out and come up to find some
more. They were mostly vermouth bottles, marsala bottles, capri bottles, empty
chianti flasks and a few cognac bottles. The porter had carried out the large bottles,
those that had held vermouth, and the straw-covered chianti flasks, and left the
brandy bottles for the last. It was the brandy bottles and a bottle shaped like a bear,
which had held kümmel, that Miss Van Campen found. The bear shaped bottle
enraged
“A Farewell to Arms” By Ernest Hemingway 62
her particularly. She held it up, the bear was sitting up on his haunches with his
paws up, there was a cork in his glass head and a few sticky crystals at the bottom. I
laughed. “It is kümmel,” I said. “The best kümmel comes in those bearshaped
bottles. It comes from Russia.” “Those are all brandy bottles, aren’t they?” Miss Van
Campen asked. “I can’t see them all,” I said. “But they probably are.” “How long has
this been going on?” “I bought them and brought them in myself,” I said. “I have had
Italian officers visit me frequently and I have kept brandy to offer them.” “You haven’t
been drinking it yourself?” she said. “I have also drunk it myself.” “Brandy,” she said.
“Eleven empty bottles of brandy and that bear liquid.” “Kümmel.” “I will send for some
one to take them away. Those are all the empty bottles you have?” “For the
moment.” “And I was pitying you having jaundice. Pity is something that is wasted on
you.” “Thank you.” “I suppose you can’t be blamed for not wanting to go back to the
front. But I should think you would try something more intelligent than producing
jaundice with alcoholism.” “With what?” “With alcoholism. You heard me say it.” I did
not say anything. “Unless you find something else I’m afraid you will have to go back
to the front when you are through with your jaundice. I don’t believe self-inflicted
jaundice entitles you to a convalescent leave.” “You don’t?” “I do not.” “Have you
ever had jaundice, Miss Van Campen?” “No, but I have seen a great deal of it.” “You
noticed how the patients enjoyed it?” “I suppose it is better than the front.” “Miss Van
Campen,” I said, “did you ever know a man who tried to disable himself by kicking
himself in the scrotum?” Miss Van Campen ignored the actual question. She had to
ignore it or leave the room. She was not ready to leave because she had disliked me
for a long time and she was now cashing in. “I have known many men to escape the
front through self-inflicted wounds.” “That wasn’t the question. I have seen selfinflicted wounds also. I asked you if you had ever known a man who had tried to
disable himself by kicking himself in the scrotum. Because that is the nearest
sensation to jaundice and it is a sensation that I believe few women have ever
experienced. That was why I asked you if you had ever had the jaundice, Miss Van
Campen, because—” Miss Van Campen left the room. Later Miss Gage came in.
“What did you say to Van Campen? She was furious.” “We were comparing
sensations. I was going to suggest that she had never experienced childbirth—”
“You’re a fool,” Gage said. “She’s after your scalp.” “She has my scalp,” I said.
“She’s lost me my leave and she might try and get me court-martialled. She’s mean
enough.” “She never liked you,” Gage said. “What’s it about?” “She says I’ve drunk
myself into jaundice so as not to go back to the front.” “Pooh,” said Gage. “I’ll swear
you’ve never taken a drink. Everybody will swear you’ve never taken a drink.” “She
found the bottles.” “I’ve told you a hundred times to clear out those bottles. Where
are they now?” “In the armoire.”

“A Farewell to Arms” By Ernest Hemingway 63

“Have you a suitcase?” “No. Put them in that rucksack.” Miss Gage packed the
bottles in the rucksack. “I’ll give them to the porter,” she said. She started for the
door. “Just a minute,” Miss Van Campen said. “I’ll take those bottles.” She had the
porter with her. “Carry them, please,” she said. “I want to show them to the doctor
when I make my report.” She went down the hall. The porter carried the sack. He
knew what was in it. Nothing happened except that I lost my leave.
23
The night I was to return to the front I sent the porter down to hold a seat for me on
the train when it came from Turin. The train was to leave at midnight. It was made up
at Turin and reached Milan about half-past ten at night and lay in the station until
time to leave. You had to be there when it came in, to get a seat. The porter took a
friend with him, a machine-gunner on leave who worked in a tailor shop, and was
sure that between them they could hold a place. I gave them money for platform
tickets and had them take my baggage. There was a big rucksack and two musettes.
I said good-by at the hospital at about five o’clock and went out. The porter had my
baggage in his lodge and I told him I would be at the station a little before midnight.
His wife called me “Signorino” and cried. She wiped her eyes and shook hands and
then cried again. I patted her on the back and she cried once more. She had done
my mending and was a very short dumpy, happy-faced woman with white hair.
When she cried her whole face went to pieces. I went down to the corner where
there was a wine shop and waited inside looking out the window. It was dark outside
and cold and misty. I paid for my coffee and grappa and I watched the people going
by in the light from the window. I saw Catherine and knocked on the window. She
looked, saw me and smiled, and I went out to meet her. She was wearing a dark
blue cape and a soft felt hat. We walked along together, along the sidewalk past the
wine shops, then across the market square and up the street and through the
archway to the cathedral square. There were streetcar tracks and beyond them was
the cathedral. It was white and wet in the mist. We crossed the tram tracks. On our
left were the shops, their windows lighted, and the entrance to the galleria. There
was a fog in the square and when we came close to the front of the cathedral it was
very big and the stone was wet. “Would you like to go in?” “No,” Catherine said. We
walked along. There was a soldier standing with his girl in the shadow of one of the
stone buttresses ahead of us and we passed them. They were standing tight up
against the stone and he had put his cape around her. “They’re like us,” I said.
“Nobody is like us,” Catherine said. She did not mean it happily. “I wish they had
some place to go.” “It mightn’t do them any good.” “I don’t know. Everybody ought to
have some place to go.” “They have the cathedral,” Catherine said. We were past it
now. We crossed the far end of the square and looked back at the cathedral. It was
fine in the mist. We were standing in front of the leather goods shop. There were
riding boots, a rucksack and ski boots in the window. Each article was set apart as
an exhibit; the rucksack in the centre, the riding boots on one side and the ski boots
on the other. The leather was dark and oiled smooth as a used saddle. The electric
light made high lights on the dull oiled leather. “We’ll ski some time.” “In two months
there will be ski-ing at Mflrren,” Catherine said. “Let’s go there.” “All right,” she said.
We went on past other windows and turned down a side street.
“A Farewell to Arms” By Ernest Hemingway 64
“I’ve never been this way.” “This is the way I go to the hospital,” I said. It was a
narrow street and we kept on the right-hand side. There were many people passing
in the fog. There were shops and all the windows were lighted. We looked in a
window at a pile of cheeses. I stopped in front of an armorer’s shop. “Come in a
minute. I have to buy a gun.” “What sort of gun?” “A pistol.” We went in and I
unbuttoned my belt and laid it with the emply holster on the counter. Two women
were behind the counter. The women brought out several pistols. “It must fit this,” I
said, opening the holster. It was a gray leather holster and I had bought it secondhand to wear in the town. “Have they good pistols?” Catherine asked. “They’re all
about the same. Can I try this one?” I asked the woman. “I have no place now to
shoot,” she said. “But it is very good. You will not make a mistake with it.” I snapped
it and pulled back the action. The spring was rather strong but it worked smoothly. I
sighted it and snapped it again. “It is used,” the woman said. “It belonged to an
officer who was an excellent shot.” “Did you sell it to him?” “Yes.” “How did you get it
back?” “From his orderly.” “Maybe you have mine,” I said. “How much is this?” “Fifty
lire. It is very cheap.” “All right. I want two extra clips and a box of cartridges.” She
brought them from under the counter. “Have you any need for a sword?” she asked.
“I have some used swords very cheap.” “I’m going to the front,” I said. “Oh yes, then
you won’t need a sword,” she said. I paid for the cartridges and the pistol, filled the
magazine and put it in place, put the pistol in my empty holster, filled the extra clips
with cartridges and put them in the leather slots on the holster and then buckled on
my belt. The pistol felt heavy on the belt. Still, I thought, it was better to have a
regulation pistol. You could always get shells. “Now we’re fully armed,” I said. “That
was the one thing I had to remember to do. Some one got my other one going to the
hospital.” “I hope it’s a good pistol,” Catherine said. “Was there anything else?” the
woman asked. “I don’t believe so.” “The pistol has a lanyard,” she said. “So I
noticed.” The woman wanted to sell something else. “You don’t need a whistle?” “I
don’t believe so.” The woman said good-by and we went out onto the sidewalk.
Catherine looked in the window. The woman looked out and bowed to us. “What are
those little mirrors set in wood for?” “They’re for attracting birds. They twirl them out
in the field and larks see them and come out and the Italians shoot them.” “They are
an ingenious people,” Catherine said. “You don’t shoot larks do you, darling, in
America?” “Not especially.” We crossed the street and started to walk up the other
side. “I feel better now,” Catherine said. “I felt terrible when we started.” “We always
feel good when we’re together.”

“A Farewell to Arms” By Ernest Hemingway 65

“We always will be together.” “Yes, except that I’m going away at midnight.” “Don’t
think about it, darling.” We walked on up the street. The fog made the lights yellow.
“Aren’t you tired?” Catherine asked. “How about you?” “I’m all right. It’s fun to walk.”
“But let’s not do it too long.” “No.” We turned down a side street where there were no
lights and walked in the street. I stopped and kissed Catherine. While I kissed her I
felt her hand on my shoulder. She had pulled my cape around her so it covered both
of us. We were standing in the street against a high wall. “Let’s go some place,” I
said. “Good,” said Catherine. We walked on along the street until it came out onto a
wider street that was beside a canal. On the other side was a brick wall and
buildings. Ahead, down the street, I saw a streetcar cross a bridge. “We can get a
cab up at the bridge,” I said. We stood on the bridge in the fog waiting for a carriage.
Several streetcars passed, full of people going home. Then a carriage came along
but there was some one in it. The fog was turning to rain. “We could walk or take a
tram,” Catherine said. “One will be along,” I said. “They go by here.” “Here one
comes,” she said. The driver stopped his horse and lowered the metal sign on his
meter. The top of the carriage was up and there were drops of water on the driver’s
coat. His varnished hat was shining in the wet. We sat back in the seat together and
the top of the carriage made it dark. “Where did you tell him to go?” “To the station.
There’s a hotel across from the station where we can go.” “We can go the way we
are? Without luggage?” “Yes,” I said. It was a long ride to the station up side streets
in the rain. “Won’t we have dinner?” Catherine asked. “I’m afraid I’ll be hungry.”
“We’ll have it in our room.” “I haven’t anything to wear. I haven’t even a night-gown.”
“We’ll get one,” I said and called to the driver. “Go to the Via Manzoni and up that.”
He nodded and turned off to the left at the next corner. On the big street Catherine
watched for a shop. “Here’s a place,” she said. I stopped the driver and Catherine
got out, walked across the sidewalk and went inside. I sat back in the carriage and
waited for her. It was raining and I could smell the wet street and the horse steaming
in the rain. She came back with a package and got in and we drove on. “I was very
extravagant, darling,” she said, “but it’s a fine night-gown.” At the hotel I asked
Catherine to wait in the carriage while I went in and spoke to the manager. There
were plenty of rooms. Then I went out to the carriage, paid the driver, and Catherine
and I walked in together. The small boy in buttons carried the package. The
manager bowed us toward the elevator. There was much red plush and brass. The
manager went up in the elevator with us. “Monsieur and Madame wish dinner in their
rooms?” “Yes. Will you have the menu brought up?” I said. “You wish something
special for dinner. Some game or a soufflé?” The elevator passed three floors with a
click each time, then clicked and stopped. “What have you as game?” “I could get a
pheasant, or a woodcock.” “A woodcock,” I said. We walked down the corridor. The
carpet was worn. There were

“A Farewell to Arms” By Ernest Hemingway 66

many doors. The manager stopped and unlocked a door and opened it. “Here you
are. A lovely room.” The small boy in buttons put the package on the table in the
centre of the room. The manager opened the curtains. “It is foggy outside,” he said.
The room was furnished in red plush. There were many mirrors, two chairs and a
large bed with a satin coverlet. A door led to the bathroom. “I will send up the menu,”
the manager said. He bowed and went out. I went to the window and looked out,
then pulled a cord that shut the thick plush curtains. Catherine was sitting on the
bed, looking at the cut glass chandelier. She had taken her hat off and her hair
shone under the light. She saw herself in one of the mirrors and put her hands to her
hair. I saw her in three other mirrors. She did not look happy. She let her cape fall on
the bed. “What’s the matter, darling?” “I never felt like a whore before,” she said. I
went over to the window and pulled the curtain aside and looked out. I had not
thought it would be like this. “You’re not a whore.” “I know it, darling. But it isn’t nice
to feel like one.” Her voice was dry and flat. “This was the best hotel we could get in,”
I said. I looked out the window. Across the square were the lights of the station.
There were carriages going by on the street and I saw the trees in the park. The
lights from the hotel shone on the wet pavement. Oh, hell, I thought, do we have to
argue now? “Come over here please,” Catherine said. The flatness was all gone out
of her voice. “Come over, please. I’m a good girl again.” I looked over at the bed.
She was smiling. I went over and sat on the bed beside her and kissed her. “You’re
my good girl.” “I’m certainly yours,” she said. After we had eaten we felt fine, and
then after, we felt very happy and in a little time the room felt like our own home. My
room at the hospital had been our own home and this room was our home too in the
same way. Catherine wore my tunic over her shoulders while we ate. We were very
hungry and the meal was good and we drank a bottle of Capri and a bottle of St.
Estephe. I drank most of it but Catherine drank some and it made her feel splendid.
For dinner we had a woodcock with soufflé potatoes and purée de marron, a salad,
and zabaione for dessert. “It’s a fine room,” Catherine said. “It’s a lovely room. We
should have stayed here all the time we’ve been in Milan.” “It’s a funny room. But it’s
nice.” “Vice is a wonderful thing,” Catherine said. “The people who go in for it seem
to have good taste about it. The red plush is really fine. It’s just the thing. And the
mirrors are very attractive.” “You’re a lovely girl.” “I don’t know how a room like this
would be for waking up in the morning. But it’s really a splendid room.” I poured
another glass of St. Estephe. “I wish we could do something really sinful,” Catherine
said. “Everything we do seems so innocent and simple. I can’t believe we do
anything wrong.” “You’re a grand girl.” “I only feel hungry. I get terribly hungry.”
“You’re a fine simple girl,” I said. “I am a simple girl. No one ever understood it
except you.” “Once when I first met you I spent an afternoon thinking how we would
go to the Hotel Cavour together and how it would be.” “That was awfully cheeky of
you. This isn’t the Cavour is it?” “No. They wouldn’t have taken us in there.” “They’ll
take us in some time. But that’s how we differ, darling. I never thought about
anything.” “Didn’t you ever at all?”

“A Farewell to Arms” By Ernest Hemingway 67

“A little,” she said. “Oh you’re a lovely girl.” I poured another glass of wine. “I’m a
very simple girl,” Catherine said. “I didn’t think so at first. I thought you were a crazy
girl.” “I was a little crazy. But I wasn’t crazy in any complicated manner. I didn’t
confuse you did I, darling?” “Wine is a grand thing,” I said. “It makes you forget all
the bad.” “It’s lovely,” said Catherine. “But it’s given my father gout very badly.”
“Have you a father?” “Yes,” said Catherine. “He has gout. You won’t ever have to
meet him. Haven’t you a father?” “No,” I said. “A step-father.” “Will I like him?” “You
won’t have to meet him.” “We have such a fine time,” Catherine said. “I don’t take
any interest in anything else any more. I’m so very happy married to you.” The waiter
came and took away the things. After a while we were very still and we could hear
the rain. Down below on the street a motor car honked. “‘But at my back I always
hear Time’s winged chariot hurrying near,’ “ I said. “I know that poem,” Catherine
said. “It’s by Marvell. But it’s about a girl who wouldn’t live with a man.” My head felt
very clear and cold and I wanted to talk facts. “Where will you have the baby?” “I
don’t know. The best place I can find.” “How will you arrange it?” “The best way I
can. Don’t worry, darling. We may have several babies before the war is over.” “It’s
nearly time to go.” “I know. You can make it time if you want.” “No.” “Then don’t
worry, darling. You were fine until now and now you’re worrying.” “I won’t. How often
will you write?” “Every day. Do they read your letters?” “They can’t read English
enough to hurt any.” “I’ll make them very confusing,” Catherine said. “But not too
confusing.” “I’ll just make them a little confusing.” “I’m afraid we have to start to go.”
“All right, darling.” “I hate to leave our fine house.” “So do I.” “But we have to go.” “All
right. But we’re never settled in our home very long.” “We will be.” “I’ll have a fine
home for you when you come back.” “Maybe I’ll be back right away.” “Perhaps you’ll
be hurt just a little in the foot.” “Or the lobe of the ear.” “No I want your ears the way
they are.” “And not my feet?” “Your feet have been hit already.” “We have to go,
darling. Really.” “All right. You go first.”

“A Farewell to Arms” By Ernest Hemingway 68

24
We walked down the stairs instead of taking the elevator. The carpet on the stairs
was worn. I had paid for the dinner when it came up and the waiter, who had brought
it, was sitting on a chair near the door. He jumped up and bowed and I went with him
into the side room and paid the bill for the room. The manager had remembered me
as a friend and refused payment in advance but when he retired he had
remembered to have the waiter stationed at the door so that I should not get out
without paying. I suppose that had happened; even with his friends. One had so
many friends in a war. I asked the waiter to get us a carriage and he took
Catherine’s package that I was carrying and went out with an umbrella. Outside
through the window we saw him crossing the street in the rain. We stood in the side
room and looked out the window. “How do you feel, Cat?” “Sleepy.” “I feel hollow
and hungry.” “Have you anything to eat?” “Yes, in my musette.” I saw the carriage
coming. It stopped, the horse’s head hanging in the rain, and the waiter stepped out,
opened his umbrella, and came toward the hotel. We met him at the door and
walked out under the umbrella down the wet walk to the carriage at the curb. Water
was running in the gutter. “There is your package on the seat,” the waiter said. He
stood with the umbrella until we were in and I had tipped him. “Many thanks.
Pleasant journey,” he said. The coachman lifted the reins and the horse started. The
waiter turned away under the umbrella and went toward the hotel. We drove down
the street and turned to the left, then came around to the right in front of the station.
There were two carabinieri standing under the light just out of the rain. The light
shone on their hats. The rain was clear and transparent against the light from the
station. A porter came out from under the shelter of the station, his shoulders up
against the rain. “No,” I said. “Thanks. I don’t need thee.” He went back under the
shelter of the archway. I turned to Catherine. Her face was in the shadow from the
hood of the carriage. “We might as well say good-by.” “I can’t go in?” “No.” “Good-by,
Cat.” “Will you tell him the hospital?” “Yes.” I told the driver the address to drive to.
He nodded. “Good-by,” I said. “Take good care of yourself and young Catherine.”
“Good-by, darling.” “Good-by,” I said. I stepped out into the rain and the carriage
started. Catherine leaned out and I saw her face in the light. She smiled and waved.
The carriage went up the street, Catherine pointed in toward the archway. I looked,
there were only the two carabinieri and the archway. I realized she meant for me to
get in out of the rain. I went in and stood and watched the carriage turn the corner.
Then I started through the station and down the runway to the train. The porter was
on the platform looking for me. I followed him into the train, crowding past people
and along the aisle and in through a door to where the machine-gunner sat in the
corner of a full compartment. My rucksack and musettes were above his head on the
luggage rack. There were many men standing in the corridor and the men in the
compartment all looked at us when we came in. There were not enough places in
the train and every one was hostile. The machine-gunner stood up for me to sit
down. Some one tapped me on the shoulder. I looked around. It was a very tall
gaunt captain of
“A Farewell to Arms” By Ernest Hemingway 69
artillery with a red scar along his jaw. He had looked through the glass on the
corridor and then come in. “What do you say?” I asked. I had turned and faced him.
He was taller than I and his face was very thin under the shadow of his cap-visor and
the scar was new and shiny. Every one in the compartment was looking at me. “You
can’t do that,” he said. “You can’t have a soldier save you a place.” “I have done it.”
He swallowed and I saw his Adam’s apple go up and then down. The machinegunner stood in front of the place. Other men looked in through the glass. No one in
the compartment said anything. “You have no right to do that. I was here two hours
before you came.” “What do you want?” “The seat.” “So do I.” I watched his face and
could feel the whole compartment against me. I did not blame them. He was in the
right. But I wanted the seat. Still no one said anything. Oh, hell, I thought. “Sit down,
Signor Capitano,” I said. The machine-gunner moved out of the way and the tall
captain sat down. He looked at me. His face seemed hurt. But he had the seat. “Get
my things,” I said to the machine-gunner. We went out in the corridor. The train was
full and I knew there was no chance of a place. I gave the porter and the machinegunner ten lire apiece. They went down the corridor and outside on the platform
looking in the windows but there were no places. “Maybe some will get off at
Brescia,” the porter said. “More will get on at Brescia,” said the machine-gunner. I
said good-by to them and we shook hands and they left. They both felt badly. Inside
the train we were all standing in the corridor when the train started. I watched the
lights of the station and the yards as we went out. It was still raining and soon the
windows were wet and you could not see out. Later I slept on the floor of the
corridor; first putting my pocket-book with my money and papers in it inside my shirt
and trousers so that it was inside the leg of my breeches. I slept all night, waking at
Brescia and Verona when more men got on the train, but going back to sleep at
once. I had my head on one of the musettes and my arms around the other and I
could feel the pack and they could all walk over me if they wouldn’t step on me. Men
were sleeping on the floor all down the corridor. Others stood holding on to the
window rods or leaning against the doors. That train was always crowded.
Book Three
25
Now in the fall the trees were all bare and the roads were muddy. I rode to Gorizia
from Udine on a camion. We passed other camions on the road and I looked at the
country. The mulberry trees were bare and the fields were brown. There were wet
dead leaves on the road from the rows of bare trees and men were working on the
road, tamping stone in the ruts from piles of crushed stone along the side of the road
between the trees. We saw the town with a mist over it that cut off the mountains.
We crossed the river and I saw that it was running high. It had been raining in the
mountains. We came into the town past the factories and then the houses and villas
and I saw that many more houses had been hit. On a narrow street we passed a
British Red Cross ambulance. The driver wore a cap and his face was thin and very
tanned. I did not know him. I got down from the camion in the big square in front of
the Town Major’s house, the driver handed down my rucksack and I put it on and
swung on the two musettes and walked to our villa. It did not feel like a homecoming.
I walked down the damp gravel driveway looking at the villa through the trees. The
windows were all shut but the door was open. I went in and found the major sitting at
a
“A Farewell to Arms” By Ernest Hemingway 70

table in the bare room with maps and typed sheets of paper on the wall. “Hello,” he
said. “How are you?” He looked older and drier. “I’m good,” I said. “How is
everything?” “It’s all over,” he said. “Take off your kit and sit down.” I put my pack
and the two musettes on the floor and my cap on the pack. I brought the other chair
over from the wall and sat down by the desk. “It’s been a bad summer,” the major
said. “Are you strong now?” “Yes.” “Did you ever get the decorations?” “Yes. I got
them fine. Thank you very much.” “Let’s see them.” I opened my cape so he could
see the two ribbons. “Did you get the boxes with the medals?” “No. Just the papers.”
“The boxes will come later. That takes more time.” “What do you want me to do?”
“The cars are all away. There are six up north at Caporetto. You know Caporetto?”
“Yes,” I said. I remembered it as a little white town with a campanile in a valley. It
was a clean little town and there was a fine fountain in the square. “They are working
from there. There are many sick now. The fighting is over.” “Where are the others?”
“There are two up in the mountains and four still on the Bainsizza. The other two
ambulance sections are in the Carso with the third army.” “What do you wish me to
do?” “You can go and take over the four cars on the Bainsizza if you like. Gino has
been up there a long time. You haven’t seen it up there, have you?” “No.” “It was
very bad. We lost three cars.” “I heard about it.” “Yes, Rinaldi wrote you.” “Where is
Rinaldi?” “He is here at the hospital. He has had a summer and fall of it.” “I believe
it.” “It has been bad,” the major said. “You couldn’t believe how bad it’s been. I’ve
often thought you were lucky to be hit when you were.” “I know I was.” “Next year will
be worse,” the major said. “Perhaps they will attack now. They say they are to attack
but I can’t believe it. It is too late. You saw the river?” “Yes. It’s high already.” “I don’t
believe they will attack now that the rains have started. We will have the snow soon.
What about your countrymen? Will there be other Americans besides yourself?”
“They are training an army of ten million.” “I hope we get some of them. But the
French will hog them all. We’ll never get any down here. All right. You stay here tonight and go out to-morrow with the little car and send Gino back. I’ll send somebody
with you that knows the road. Gino will tell you everything. They are shelling quite a
little still but it is all over. You will want to see the Bainsizza.” “I’m glad to see it. I am
glad to be back with you again, Signor Maggiore.” He smiled. “You are very good to
say so. I am very tired of this war. If I was away I do not believe I would come back.”
“Is it so bad?” “Yes. It is so bad and worse. Go get cleaned up and find your friend
Rinaldi.” I went out and carried my bags up the stairs. Rinaldi was not in the room
but his things were there and I sat down on the bed and unwrapped my puttees and
took the shoe off my right foot. Then I lay back on the bed. I was tired and my right
foot hurt. It seemed

“A Farewell to Arms” By Ernest Hemingway 71

silly to lie on the bed with one shoe off, so I sat up and unlaced the other shoe and
dropped it on the floor, then lay back on the blanket again. The room was stuffy with
the window closed but I was too tired to get up and open it. I saw my things were all
in one corner of the room. Outside it was getting dark. I lay on the bed and thought
about Catherine and waited for Rinaldi. I was going to try not to think about
Catherine except at night before I went to sleep. But now I was tired and there was
nothing to do, so I lay and thought about her. I was thinking about her when Rinaldi
came in. He looked just the same. Perhaps he was a little thinner. “Well, baby,” he
said. I sat up on the bed. He came over, sat down and put his arm around me.
“Good old baby.” He whacked me on the back and I held both his arms. “Old baby,”
he said. “Let me see your knee.” “I’ll have to take off my pants.” “Take off your pants,
baby. We’re all friends here. I want to see what kind of a job they did.” I stood up,
took off the breeches and pulled off the knee-brace. Rinaldi sat on the floor and bent
the knee gently back and forth. He ran his finger along the scar; put his thumbs
together over the kneecap and rocked the knee gently with his fingers. “Is that all the
articulation you have?” “Yes.” “It’s a crime to send you back. They ought to get
complete articulation.” “It’s a lot better than it was. It was stiff as a board.” Rinaldi
bent it more. I watched his hands. He had fine surgeon’s hands. I looked at the top
of his head, his hair shiny and parted smoothly. He bent the knee too far. “Ouch!” I
said. “You ought to have more treatment on it with the machines,” Rinaldi said. “It’s
better than it was.” “I see that, baby. This is something I know more about than you.”
He stood up and sat down on the bed. “The knee itself is a good job.” He was
through with the knee. “Tell me all about everything.” “There’s nothing to tell,” I said.
“I’ve led a quiet life.” “You act like a married man,” he said. “What’s the matter with
you?” “Nothing,” I said. “What’s the matter with you?” “This war is killing me,” Rinaldi
said, “I am very depressed by it.” He folded his hands over his knee. “Oh,” I said.
“What’s the matter? Can’t I even have human impulses?” “No. I can see you’ve been
having a fine time. Tell me.” “All summer and all fall I’ve operated. I work all the time.
I do everybody’s work. All the hard ones they leave to me. By God, baby, I am
becoming a lovely surgeon.” “That sounds better.” “I never think. No, by God, I don’t
think; I operate.” “That’s right.” “But now, baby, it’s all over. I don’t operate now and I
feel like hell. This is a terrible war, baby. You believe me when I say it. Now you
cheer me up. Did you bring the phonograph records?” “Yes.” They were wrapped in
paper in a cardboard box in my rucksack. I was too tired to get them out. “Don’t you
feel good yourself, baby?” “I feel like hell.” “This war is terrible,” Rinaldi said. “Come
on. We’ll both get drunk and be cheerful. Then we’ll go get the ashes dragged. Then
we’ll feel fine.” “I’ve had the jaundice,” I said, “and I can’t get drunk.” “Oh, baby, how
you’ve come back to me. You come back serious and with a liver. I tell you this war
is a bad thing. Why did we make it anyway.” “We’ll have a drink. I don’t want to get
drunk but we’ll have a drink.”

“A Farewell to Arms” By Ernest Hemingway 72

Rinaldi went across the room to the washstand and brought back two glasses and a
bottle of cognac. “It’s Austrian cognac,” he said. “Seven stars. It’s all they captured
on San Gabriele.” “Were you up there?” “No. I haven’t been anywhere. I’ve been
here all the time operating. Look, baby, this is your old tooth-brushing glass. I kept it
all the time to remind me of you.” “To remind you to brush your teeth.” “No. I have
my own too. I kept this to remind me of you trying to brush away the Villa Rossa from
your teeth in the morning, swearing and eating aspirin and cursing harlots. Every
time I see that glass I think of you trying to clean your conscience with a toothbrush.”
He came over to the bed. “Kiss me once and tell me you’re not serious.” “I never kiss
you. You’re an ape.” “I know, you are the fine good Anglo-Saxon boy. I know. You
are the remorse boy, I know. I will wait till I see the Anglo-Saxon brushing away
harlotry with a toothbrush.” “Put some cognac in the glass.” We touched glasses and
drank. Rinaldi laughed at me. “I will get you drunk and take out your liver and put you
in a good Italian liver and make you a man again.” I held the glass for some more
cognac. It was dark outside now. Holding the glass of cognac, I went over and
opened the window. The rain had stopped falling. It was colder outside and there
was a mist in the trees. “Don’t throw the cognac out the window,” Rinaldi said. “If you
can’t drink it give it to me.” “Go something yourself,” I said. I was glad to see Rinaldi
again. He had spent two years teasing me and I had always liked it. We understood
each other very well. “Are you married?” he asked from the bed. I was standing
against the wall by the window. “Not yet.” “Are you in love?” “Yes.” “With that English
girl?” “Yes.” “Poor baby. Is she good to you?” “Of course.” “I mean is she good to
you practically speaking?” “Shut up.” “I will. You will see I am a man of extreme
delicacy. Does she—?” “Rinin,” I said. “Please shut up. If you want to be my friend,
shut up.” “I don’t want to be your friend, baby. I am your friend.” “Then shut up.” “All
right.” I went over to the bed and sat down beside Rinaldi. He was holding his glass
and looking at the floor. “You see how it is, Rinin?” “Oh, yes. All my life I encounter
sacred subjects. But very few with you. I suppose you must have them too.” He
looked at the floor. “You haven’t any?” “Not any?” “No.” “I can say this about your
mother and that about your sister?” “And that about your sister,” Rinaldi said swiftly.
We both laughed. “The old superman,” I said. “I am jealous maybe,” Rinaldi said.
“No, you’re not.” “I don’t mean like that. I mean something else. Have you any
married friends?”

“A Farewell to Arms” By Ernest Hemingway 73

“Yes,” I said. “I haven’t,” Rinaldi said. “Not if they love each other.” “Why not?” “They
don’t like me.” “Why not?” “I am the snake. I am the snake of reason.” “You’re getting
it mixed. The apple was reason.” “No, it was the snake.” He was more cheerful. “You
are better when you don’t think so deeply,” I said. “I love you, baby,” he said. “You
puncture me when I become a great Italian thinker. But I know many things I can’t
say. I know more than you.” “Yes. You do.” “But you will have a better time. Even
with remorse you will have a better time.” “I don’t think so.” “Oh, yes. That is true.
Already I am only happy when I am working.” He looked at the floor again. “You’ll get
over that.” “No. I only like two other things; one is bad for my work and the other is
over in half an hour or fifteen minutes. Sometimes less.” “Sometimes a good deal
less.” “Perhaps I have improved, baby. You do not know. But there are only the two
things and my work.” “You’ll get other things.” “No. We never get anything. We are
born with all we have and we never learn. We never get anything new. We all start
complete. You should be glad not to be a Latin.” “There’s no such thing as a Latin.
That is ‘Latin’ thinking. You are so proud of your defects.” Rinaldi looked up and
laughed. “We’ll stop, baby. I am tired from thinking so much.” He had looked tired
when he came in. “It’s nearly time to eat. I’m glad you’re back. You are my best
friend and my war brother.” “When do the war brothers eat?” I asked. “Right away.
We’ll drink once more for your liver’s sake.” “Like Saint Paul.” “You are inaccurate.
That was wine and the stomach. Take a little wine for your stomach’s sake.”
“Whatever you have in the bottle,” I said. “For any sake you mention.” “To your girl,”
Rinaldi said. He held out his glass. “All right.” “I’ll never say a dirty thing about her.”
“Don’t strain yourself.” He drank off the cognac. “I am pure,” he said. “I am like you,
baby. I will get an English girl too. As a matter of fact I knew your girl first but she
was a little tall for me. A tall girl for a sister,” he quoted. “You have a lovely pure
mind,” I said. “Haven’t I? That’s why they call me Rinaldo Purissimo.” “Rinaldo
Sporchissimo.” “Come on, baby, we’ll go down to eat while my mind is still pure.” I
washed, combed my hair and we went down the stairs. Rinaldi was a little drunk. In
the room where we ate, the meal was not quite ready. “I’ll go get the bottle,” Rinaldi
said. He went off up the stairs. I sat at the table and he came back with the bottle
and poured us each a half tumbler of cognac. “Too much,” I said and held up the
glass and sighted at the lamp on the table. “Not for an empty stomach. It is a
wonderful thing. It burns out the stomach completely. Nothing is worse for you.”

“A Farewell to Arms” By Ernest Hemingway 74

“All right.” “Self-destruction day by day,” Rinaldi said. “It ruins the stomach and
makes the hand shake. Just the thing for a surgeon.” “You recommend it?” “Heartily.
I use no other. Drink it down, baby, and look forward to being sick.” I drank half the
glass. In the hall I could hear the orderly calling. “Soup! Soup is ready!” The major
came in, nodded to us and sat down. He seemed very small at table. “Is this all we
are?” he asked. The orderly put the soup bowl down and he ladled out a plate full.
“We are all,” Rinaldi said. “Unless the priest comes. If he knew Federico was here he
would be here.” “Where is he?” I asked. “He’s at 307,” the major said. He was busy
with his soup. He wiped his mouth, wiping his upturned gray mustache carefully. “He
will come I think. I called them and left word to tell him you were here.” “I miss the
noise of the mess,” I said. “Yes, it’s quiet,” the major said. “I will be noisy,” said
Rinaldi. “Drink some wine, Enrico,” said the major. He filled my glass. The spaghetti
came in and we were all busy. We were finishing the spaghetti when the priest came
in. He was the same as ever, small and brown and compact looking. I stood up and
we shook hands. He put his hand on my shoulder. “I came as soon as I heard,” he
said. “Sit down,” the major said. “You’re late.” “Good-evening, priest,” Rinaldi said,
using the English word. They had taken that up from the priest-baiting captain, who
spoke a little English. “Good-evening, Rinaldo,” the priest said. The orderly brought
him soup but he said he would start with the spaghetti. “How are you?” he asked me.
“Fine,” I said. “How have things been?” “Drink some wine, priest,” Rinaldi said. “Take
a little wine for your stomach’s sake. That’s Saint Paul, you know.” “Yes I know,” said
the priest politely. Rinaldi filled his glass. “That Saint Paul,” said Rinaldi. “He’s the
one who makes all the trouble.” The priest looked at me and smiled. I could see that
the baiting did not touch him now. “That Saint Paul,” Rinaldi said. “He was a rounder
and a chaser and then when he was no longer hot he said it was no good. When he
was finished he made the rules for us who are still hot. Isn’t it true, Federico?” The
major smiled. We were eating meat stew now. “I never discuss a Saint after dark,” I
said. The priest looked up from the stew and smiled at me. “There he is, gone over
with the priest,” Rinaldi said. “Where are all the good old priest-baiters? Where is
Cavalcanti? Where is Brundi? Where is Cesare? Do I have to bait this priest alone
without support?” “He is a good priest,” said the major. “He is a good priest,” said
Rinaldi. “But still a priest. I try to make the mess like the old days. I want to make
Federico happy. To hell with you, priest!” I saw the major look at him and notice that
he was drunk. His thin face was white. The line of his hair was very black against the
white of his forehead. “It’s all right, Rinaldo,” said the priest. “It’s all right.” “To hell
with you,” said Rinaldi. “To hell with the whole damn business.” He sat back in his
chair. “He’s been under a strain and he’s tired,” the major said to me. He finished his
meat and wiped up the gravy with a piece of bread. “I don’t give a damn,” Rinaldi
said to the table. “To hell with the whole business.” He looked defiantly around the
table, his eyes flat, his face pale.

“A Farewell to Arms” By Ernest Hemingway 75

“All right,” I said. “To hell with the whole damn business.” “No, no,” said Rinaldi. “You
can’t do it. You can’t do it. I say you can’t do it. You’re dry and you’re empty and
there’s nothing else. There’s nothing else I tell you. Not a damned thing. I know,
when I stop working.” The priest shook his head. The orderly took away the stew
dish. “What are you eating meat for?” Rinaldi turned to the priest. “Don’t you know
it’s Friday?” “It’s Thursday,” the priest said. “It’s a lie. It’s Friday. You’re eating the
body of our Lord. It’s God-meat. I know. It’s dead Austrian. That’s what you’re
eating.” “The white meat is from officers,” I said, completing the old joke. Rinaldi
laughed. He filled his glass. “Don’t mind me,” he said. “I’m just a little crazy.” “You
ought to have a leave,” the priest said. The major shook his head at him. Rinaldi
looked at the priest. “You think I ought to have a leave?” The major shook his head
at the priest. Rinaldi was looking at the priest. “Just as you like,” the priest said. “Not
if you don’t want.” “To hell with you,” Rinaldi said. “They try to get rid of me. Every
night they try to get rid of me. I fight them off. What if I have it. Everybody has it. The
whole world’s got it. First,” he went on, assuming the manner of a lecturer, “it’s a little
pimple. Then we notice a rash between the shoulders. Then we notice nothing at all.
We put our faith in mercury.” “Or salvarsan,” the major interrupted quietly. “A
mercurial product,” Rinaldi said. He acted very elated now. “I know something worth
two of that. Good old priest,” he said. “You’ll never get it. Baby will get it. It’s an
industrial accident. It’s a simple industrial accident.” The orderly brought in the sweet
and coffee. The dessert was a sort of black bread pudding with hard sauce. The
lamp was smoking; the black smoke going close up inside the chimney. “Bring two
candles and take away the lamp,” the major said. The orderly brought two lighted
candles each in a saucer, and took out the lamp blowing it out. Rinaldi was quiet
now. He seemed all right. We talked and after the coffee we all went out into the hall.
“You want to talk to the priest. I have to go in the town,” Rinaldi said. “Good-night,
priest.” “Good-night, Rinaldo,” the priest said. “I’ll see you, Fredi,” Rinaldi said. “Yes,”
I said. “Come in early.” He made a face and went out the door. The major was
standing with us. “He’s very tired and overworked,” he said. “He thinks too he has
syphilis. I don’t believe it but he may have. He is treating himself for it. Good-night.
You will leave before daylight, Enrico?” “Yes.” “Good-by then,” he said. “Good luck.
Peduzzi will wake you and go with you.” “Good-by, Signor Maggiore.” “Good-by.
They talk about an Austrian offensive but I don’t believe it. I hope not. But anyway it
won’t be here. Gino will tell you everything. The telephone works well now.” “I’ll call
regularly.” “Please do. Good-night. Don’t let Rinaldi drink so much brandy.” “I’ll try
not to.” “Good-night, priest.” “Good-night, Signor Maggiore.” He went off into his
office.
26
“A Farewell to Arms” By Ernest Hemingway 76
I went to the door and looked out. It had stopped raining but there was a mist.
“Should we go upstairs?” I asked the priest. “I can only stay a little while.” “Come on
up.” We climbed the stairs and went into my room. I lay down on Rinaldi’s bed. The
priest sat on my cot that the orderly had set up. It was dark in the room. “Well,” he
said, “how are you really?” “I’m all right. I’m tired to-night.” “I’m tired too, but from no
cause.” “What about the war?” “I think it will be over soon. I don’t know why, but I
feel it.” “How do you feel it?” “You know how your major is? Gentle? Many people
are like that now.” “I feel that way myself,” I said. “It has been a terrible summer,”
said the priest. He was surer of himself now than when I had gone away. “You
cannot believe how it has been. Except that you have been there and you know how
it can be. Many people have realized the war this summer. Officers whom I thought
could never realize it realize it now.” “What will happen?” Istroked the blanket with
my hand. “I do not know but I do not think it can go on much longer.” “What will
happen?” “They will stop fighting.” “Who?” “Both sides.” “I hope so,” I said. “You
don’t believe it?” “I don’t believe both sides will stop fighting at once.” “I suppose not.
It is too much to expect. But when I see the changes in men I do not think it can go
on.” “Who won the fighting this summer?” “No one.” “The Austrians won,” I said.
“They kept them from taking San Gabriele. They’ve won. They won’t stop fighting.”
“If they feel as we feel they may stop. They have gone through the same thing.” “No
one ever stopped when they were winning.” “You discourage me.” “I can only say
what I think.” “Then you think it will go on and on? Nothing will ever happen?” “I don’t
know. I only think the Austrians will not stop when they have won a victory. It is in
defeat that we become Christian.” “The Austrians are Christians—except for the
Bosnians.” “I don’t mean technically Christian. I mean like Our Lord.” He said
nothing. “We are all gentler now because we are beaten. How would Our Lord have
been if Peter had rescued him in the Garden?” “He would have been just the same.”
“I don’t think so,” I said. “You discourage me,” he said. “I believe and I pray that
something will happen. I have felt it very close.” “Something may happen,” I said.
“But it will happen only to us. If they felt the way we do, it would be all right. But they
have beaten us. They feel another way.” “Many of the soldiers have always felt this
way. It is not because they were beaten.” “They were beaten to start with. They were
beaten when they took them from their farms and put them in the army. That is why
the peasant has wisdom, because he is defeated from the start. Put him in power
and see how wise he is.”

“A Farewell to Arms” By Ernest Hemingway 77

He did not say anything. He was thinking. “Now I am depressed myself,” I said.
“That’s why I never think about these things. I never think and yet when I begin to
talk I say the things I have found out in my mind without thinking.” “I had hoped for
something.” “Defeat?” “No. Something more.” “There isn’t anything more. Except
victory. It may be worse.” “I hoped for a long time for victory.” “Me too.” “Now I don’t
know.” “It has to be one or the other.” “I don’t believe in victory any more.” “I don’t.
But I don’t believe in defeat. Though it may be better.” “What do you believe in?” “In
sleep,” I said. He stood up. “I am very sorry to have stayed so long. But I like so to
talk with you.” “It is very nice to talk again. I said that about sleeping, meaning
nothing.” We stood up and shook hands in the dark. “I sleep at 307 now,” he said. “I
go out on post early to-morrow.” “I’ll see you when you come hack.” “We’ll have a
walk and talk together.” I walked with him to the door. “Don’t go down,” he said. “It is
very nice that you are back. Though not so nice for you.” He put his hand on my
shoulder. “It’s all right for me,” I said. “Good-night.” “Good-night. Ciaou!” “Ciaou!” I
said. I was deadly sleepy.
27
I woke when Rinaldi came in but he did not talk and I went back to sleep again. In
the morning I was dressed and gone before it was light. Rinaldi did not wake when I
left. I had not seen the Bainsizza before and it was strange to go up the slope where
the Austrians had been, beyond the place on the river where I had been wounded.
There was a steep new road and many trucks. Beyond, the road flattened out and I
saw woods and steep hills in the mist. There were woods that had been taken
quickly and not smashed. Then beyond where the road was not protected by the hills
it was screened by matting on the sides and over the top. The road ended in a
wrecked village. The lines were up beyond. There was much artillery around. The
houses were badly smashed but things were very well organized and there were
signboards everywhere. We found Gino and he got us some coffee and later I went
with him and met various people and saw the posts. Gino said the British cars were
working further down the Bainsizza at Ravne. He had great admiration for the British.
There was still a certain amount of shelling, he said, but not many wounded. There
would be many sick now the rains had started. The Austrians were supposed to
attack but he did not believe it. We were supposed to attack too, but they had not
brought up any new troops so he thought that was off too. Food was scarce and he
would be glad to get a full meal in Gorizia. What kind of supper had I had? I told him
and he said that would be wonderful. He was especially impressed by the dolce. I
did not describe it in detail, only said it was a dolce, and I think he believed it was
something more elaborate than bread pudding. Did I know where he was going to
go? I said I didn’t but that some of the other cars were at Caporetto. He hoped he
would go up that way. It was a nice little place and he liked the high mountain
hauling up beyond. He was a nice boy and every one seemed to like him. He said
where it really had been hell was at San Gabriele and the attack
“A Farewell to Arms” By Ernest Hemingway 78
beyond Lom that had gone bad. He said the Austrians had a great amount of artillery
in the woods along Ternova ridge beyond and above us, and shelled the roads badly
at night. There was a battery of naval guns that had gotten on his nerves. I would
recognize them because of their flat trajectory. You heard the report and then the
shriek commenced almost instantly. They usually fired two guns at once, one right
after the other, and the fragments from the burst were enormous. He showed me
one, a smoothly jagged piece of metal over a foot long. It looked like babbitting
metal. “I don’t suppose they are so effective,” Gino said. “But they scare me. They all
sound as though they came directly for you. There is the boom, then instantly the
shriek and burst. What’s the use of not being wounded if they scare you to death?”
He said there were Croats in the lines opposite us now and some Magyars. Our
troops were still in the attacking positions. There was no wire to speak of and no
place to fall back to if there should be an Austrian attack. There were fine positions
for defense along the low mountains that came up out of the plateau but nothing had
been done about organizing them for defense. What did I think about the Bainsizza
anyway? I had expected it to be flatter, more like a plateau. I had not realized it was
so broken up. “Alto piano,” Gino said, “but no piano.” We went back to the cellar of
the house where he lived. I said I thought a ridge that flattened out on top and had a
little depth would be easier and more practical to hold than a succession of small
mountains. It was no harder to attack up a mountain than on the level, I argued.
“That depends on the mountains,” he said. “Look at San Gabriele.” “Yes,” I said, “but
where they had trouble was at the top where it was flat. They got up to the top easy
enough.” “Not so easy,” he said. “Yes,” I said, “but that was a special case because
it was a fortress rather than a mountain, anyway. The Austrians had been fortifying it
for years.” I meant tactically speaking in a war where there was some movement a
succession of mountains were nothing to hold as a line because it was too easy to
turn them. You should have possible mobility and a mountain is not very mobile.
Also, people always over-shoot downhill. If the flank were turned, the best men
would be left on the highest mountains. I did not believe in a war in mountains. I had
thought about it a lot, I said. You pinched off one mountain and they pinched off
another but when something really started every one had to get down off the
mountains. What were you going to do if you had a mountain frontier? he asked. I
had not worked that out yet, I said, and we both laughed. “But,” I said, “in the old
days the Austrians were always whipped in the quadrilateral around Verona. They let
them come down onto the plain and whipped them there.” “Yes,” said Gino. “But
those were Frenchmen and you can work out military problems clearly when you are
fighting in somebody else’s country.” “Yes,” I agreed, “when it is your own country
you cannot use it so scientifically.” “The Russians did, to trap Napoleon.” “Yes, but
they had plenty of country. If you tried to retreat to trap Napoleon in Italy you would
find yourself in Brindisi.” “A terrible place,” said Gino. “Have you ever been there?”
“Not to stay.” “I am a patriot,” Gino said. “But I cannot love Brindisi or Taranto.” “Do
you love the Bainsizza?” I asked. “The soil is sacred,” he said. “But I wish it grew
more potatoes. You know when we came here we found fields of potatoes the
Austrians had planted.” “Has the food really been short?” “I myself have never had
enough to eat but I am a big eater and I have not starved. The mess is average. The
regiments in the line get pretty good food but those in support don’t get so much.
Something is wrong somewhere. There should be plenty of food.” “The dogfish are
selling it somewhere else.”

“A Farewell to Arms” By Ernest Hemingway 79

“Yes, they give the battalions in the front line as much as they can but the ones in
back are very short. They have eaten all the Austrians’ potatoes and chestnuts from
the woods. They ought to feed them better. We are big eaters. I am sure there is
plenty of food. It is very bad for the soldiers to be short of food. Have you ever
noticed the difference it makes in the way you think?” “Yes,” I said. “It can’t win a war
but it can lose one.” “We won’t talk about losing. There is enough talk about losing.
What has been done this summer cannot have been done in vain.” I did not say
anything. I was always embarrassed by the words sacred, glorious, and sacrifice and
the expression in vain. We had heard them, sometimes standing in the rain almost
out of earshot, so that only the shouted words came through, and had read them, on
proclamations that were slapped up by billposters over other proclamations, now for
a long time, and I had seen nothing sacred, and the things that were glorious had no
glory and the sacrifices were like the stockyards at Chicago if nothing was done with
the meat except to bury it. There were many words that you could not stand to hear
and finally only the names of places had dignity. Certain numbers were the same
way and certain dates and these with the names of the places were all you could say
and have them mean anything. Abstract words such as glory, honor, courage, or
hallow were obscene beside the concrete names of villages, the numbers of roads,
the names of rivers, the numbers of regiments and the dates. Gino was a patriot, so
he said things that separated us sometimes, but he was also a fine boy and I
understood his being a patriot. He was born one. He left with Peduzzi in the car to go
back to Gorizia. It stormed all that day. The wind drove down the rain and
everywhere there was standing water and mud. The plaster of the broken houses
was gray and wet. Late in the afternoon the rain stopped and from out number two
post I saw the bare wet autumn country with clouds over the tops of the hills and the
straw screening over the roads wet and dripping. The sun came out once before it
went down and shone on the bare woods beyond the ridge. There were many
Austrian guns in the woods on that ridge but only a few fired. I watched the sudden
round puffs of shrapnel smoke in the sky above a broken farmhouse near where the
line was; soft puffs with a yellow white flash in the centre. You saw the flash, then
heard the crack, then saw the smoke ball distort and thin in the wind. There were
many iron shrapnel balls in the rubble of the houses and on the road beside the
broken house where the post was, but they did not shell near the post that afternoon.
We loaded two cars and drove down the road that was screened with wet mats and
the last of the sun came through in the breaks between the strips of mattings. Before
we were out on the clear road behind the hill the sun was down. We went on down
the clear road and as it turned a corner into the open and went into the square
arched tunnel of matting the rain started again. The wind rose in the night and at
three o’clock in the morning with the rain coming in sheets there was a
bombardment and the Croatians came over across the mountain meadows and
through patches of woods and into the front line. They fought in the dark in the rain
and a counter-attack of scared men from the second line drove them back. There
was much shelling and many rockets in the rain and machine-gun and rifle fire all
along the line. They did not come again and it was quieter and between the gusts of
wind and rain we could hear the sound of a great bombardment far to the north. The
wounded were coming into the post, some were carried on stretchers, some walking
and some were brought on the backs of men that came across the field. They were
wet to the skin and all were scared. We filled two cars with stretcher cases as they
came up from the cellar of the post and as I shut the door of the second car and
fastened it I felt the rain on my face turn to snow. The flakes were coming heavy and
fast in the rain. When daylight came the storm was still blowing but the snow had
stopped. It had melted as it fell on the wet ground and now it was raining again.
There was another attack just after daylight but it was unsuccessful. We expected an
attack all day but it did not come until the sun was going down. The bombardment
started to the south below

“A Farewell to Arms” By Ernest Hemingway 80

the long wooded ridge where the Austrian guns were concentrated. We expected a
bombardment but it did not come. It was getting dark. Guns were firing from the field
behind the village and the shells, going away, had a comfortable sound. We heard
that the attack to the south had been unsuccessful. They did not attack that night but
we heard that they had broken through to the north. In the night word came that we
were to prepare to retreat. The captain at the post told me this. He had it from the
Brigade. A little while later he came from the telephone and said it was a lie. The
Brigade had received orders that the line of the Bainsizza should be held no matter
what happened. I asked about the break through and he said that he had heard at
the Brigade that the Austrians had broken through the twenty-seventh army corps up
toward Caporetto. There had been a great battle in the north all day. “If those
bastards let them through we are cooked,” he said. “It’s Germans that are attacking,”
one of the medical officers said. The word Germans was something to be frightened
of. We did not want to have anything to do with the Germans. “There are fifteen
divisions of Germans,” the medical officer said. “They have broken through and we
will be cut off.” “At the Brigade, they say this line is to be held. They say they have
not broken through badly and that we will hold a line across the mountains from
Monte Maggiore.” “Where do they hear this?” “From the Division.” “The word that we
were to retreat came from the Division.” “We work under the Army Corps,” I said.
“But here I work under you. Naturally when you tell me to go I will go. But get the
orders straight.” “The orders are that we stay here. You clear the wounded from here
to the clearing station.” “Sometimes we clear from the clearing station to the field
hospitals too,” I said. “Tell me, I have never seen a retreat—if there is a retreat how
are all the wounded evacuated?” “They are not. They take as many as they can and
leave the rest.” “What will I take in the cars?” “Hospital equipment.” “All right,” I said.
The next night the retreat started. We heard that Germans and Austrians had broken
through in the north and were coming down the mountain valleys toward Cividale
and Udine. The retreat was orderly, wet and sullen. In the night, going slowly along
the crowded roads we passed troops marching under the rain, guns, horses pulling
wagons, mules, motor trucks, all moving away from the front. There was no more
disorder than in an advance. That night we helped empty the field hospitals that had
been set up in the least ruined villages of the plateau, taking the wounded down to
Plava on the river-bed: and the next day hauled all day in the rain to evacuate the
hospitals and clearing station at Plava. It rained steadily and the army of the
Bainsizza moved down off the plateau in the October rain and across the river where
the great victories had commenced in the spring of that year. We came into Gorizia
in the middle of the next day. The rain had stopped and the town was nearly empty.
As we came up the street they were loading the girls from the soldiers’ whorehouse
into a truck. There were seven girls and they had on their hats and coats and carried
small suitcases. Two of them were crying. Of the others one smiled at us and put out
her tongue and fluttered it up and down. She had thick full lips and black eyes. I
stopped the car and went over and spoke to the matron. The girls from the officers’
house had left early that morning, she said. Where were they going? To Conegliano,
she said. The truck started. The girl with thick lips put out her tongue again at us.
The matron waved. The two girls kept on crying. The others looked interestedly out
at the town. I got back in the car.

“A Farewell to Arms” By Ernest Hemingway 81

“We ought to go with them,” Bonello said. “That would be a good trip.” “We’ll have a
good trip,” I said. “We’ll have a hell of a trip.” “That’s what I mean,” I said. We came
up the drive to the villa. “I’d like to be there when some of those tough babies climb
in and try and hop them.” “You think they will?” “Sure. Everybody in the Second
Army knows that matron.” We were outside the villa. “They call her the Mother
Superior,” Bonello said. “The girls are new but everybody knows her. They must
have brought them up just before the retreat.” “They’ll have a time.” “I’ll say they’ll
have a time. I’d like to have a crack at them for nothing. They charge too much at
that house anyway. The government gyps us.” “Take the car out and have the
mechanics go over it,” I said. “Change the oil and check the differential. Fill it up and
then get some sleep.” “Yes, Signor Tenente.” The villa was empty. Rinaldi was gone
with the hospital. The major was gone taking hospital personnel in the staff car.
There was a note on the window for me to fill the cars with the material piled in the
hall and to proceed to Pordenone. The mechanics were gone already. I went out
back to the garage. The other two cars came in while I was there and their drivers
got down. It was starting to rain again. “I’m so—sleepy I went to sleep three times
coming here from Plava,” Piani said. “What are we going to do, Tenente?” “We’ll
change the oil, grease them, fill them up, then take them around in front and load up
the junk they’ve left.” “Then do we start?” “No, we’ll sleep for three hours.” “Christ I’m
glad to sleep,” Bonello said. “I couldn’t keep awake driving.” “How’s your car,
Aymo?” I asked. “It’s all right.” “Get me a monkey suit and I’ll help you with the oil.”
“Don’t you do that, Tenente,” Aymo said. “Ifs nothing to do. You go and pack your
things.” “My things are all packed,” I said. “I’ll go and carry out the stuff that they left
for us. Bring the cars around as soon as they’re ready.” They brought the cars
around to the front of the villa and we loaded them with the hospital equipment which
was piled in the hallway. When it was all in, the three cars stood in line down the
driveway under the trees in the rain. We went inside. “Make a fire in the kitchen and
dry your things,” I said. “I don’t care about dry clothes,” Piani said. “I want to sleep.”
“I’m going to sleep on the major’s bed,” Bonello said. “I’m going to sleep where the
old man corks off.” “I don’t care where I sleep,” Piani said. “There are two beds in
here.” I opened the door. “I never knew what was in that room,” Bonello said. “That
was old fish-face’s room,” Piani said. “You two sleep in there,” I said. “I’ll wake you.”
“The Austrians will wake us if you sleep too long, Tenente,” Bonello said. “I won’t
oversleep,” I said. “Where’s Aymo?” “He went out in the kitchen.” “Get to sleep,” I
said. “I’ll sleep,” Piani said. “I’ve been asleep sitting up all day. The whole top of my
head kept coming down over my eyes.” “Take your boots off,” Bonello said. “That’s
old fish-face’s bed.” “Fish-face is nothing to me.” Piani lay on the bed, his muddy
boots straight out, his

“A Farewell to Arms” By Ernest Hemingway 82

head on his arm. I went out to the kitchen. Aymo had a fire in the stove and a kettle
of water on. “I thought I’d start some pasta asciutta,” he said. “We’ll be hungry when
we wake up.” “Aren’t you sleepy, Bartolomeo?” “Not so sleepy. When the water boils
I’ll leave it. The fire will go down.” “You’d better get some sleep,” I said. “We can eat
cheese and monkey meat.” “This is better,” he said. “Something hot will be good for
those two anarchists. You go to sleep, Tenente.” “There’s a bed in the major’s
room.” “You sleep there.” “No, I’m going up to my old room. Do you want a drink,
Bartolomeo?” “When we go, Tenente. Now it wouldn’t do me any good.” “If you wake
in three hours and I haven’t called you, wake me, will you?” “I haven’t any watch,
Tenente.” “There’s a clock on the wall in the major’s room.” “All right.” I went out then
through the dining-room and the hall and up the marble stairs to the room where I
had lived with Rinaldi. It was raining outside. I went to the window and looked out. It
was getting dark and I saw the three cars standing in line under the trees. The trees
were dripping in the rain. It was cold and the drops hung to the branches. I went
back to Rinaldi’s bed and lay down and let sleep take me. We ate in the kitchen
before we started. Aymo had a basin of spaghetti with onions and tinned meat
chopped up in it. We sat around the table and drank two bottles of the wine that had
been left in the cellar of the villa. It was dark outside and still raining. Piani sat at the
table very sleepy. “I like a retreat better than an advance,” Bonello said. “On a retreat
we drink barbera.” “We drink it now. To-morrow maybe we drink rainwater,” Aymo
said. “To-morrow we’ll be in Udine. We’ll drink champagne. That’s where the
slackers live. Wake up, Piani! We’ll drink champagne tomorrow in Udine!” “I’m
awake,” Piani said. He filled his plate with the spaghetti and meat. “Couldn’t you find
tomato sauce, Barto?” “There wasn’t any,” Aymo said. “We’ll drink champagne in
Udine,” Bonello said. He filled his glass with the clear red barbera. “We may drink—
before Udine,” Piani said. “Have you eaten enough, Tenente?” Aymo asked. “I’ve got
plenty. Give me the bottle, Bartolomeo.” “I have a bottle apiece to take in the cars,”
Aymo said. “Did you sleep at all?” “I don’t need much sleep. I slept a little.” “Tomorrow we’ll sleep in the king’s bed,” Bonello said. He was feeling very good. “Tomorrow maybe we’ll sleep in—,” Piani said. “I’ll sleep with the queen,” Bonello said.
He looked to see how I took the joke. “You’ll sleep with—,” Piani said sleepily.
“That’s treason, Tenente,” Bonello said. “Isn’t that treason?” “Shut up,” I said. “You
get too funny with a little wine.” Outside it was raining hard. I looked at my watch. It
was half-past nine. “It’s time to roll,” I said and stood up. “Who are you going to ride
with, Tenehte?” Bonello asked. “With Aymo. Then you come. Then Piani. We’ll start
out on the road for Cormons.” “I’m afraid I’ll go to sleep,” Piani said. “All right. I’ll ride
with you. Then Bonello. Then Aymo.” “That’s the best way,” Piani said. “Because I’m
so sleepy.” “I’ll drive and you sleep awhile.”

“A Farewell to Arms” By Ernest Hemingway 83

“No. I can drive just so long as I know somebody will wake me up if I go to sleep.” “I’ll
wake you up. Put out the lights, Barto.” “You might as well leave them,” Bonello said.
“We’ve got no more use for this place.” “I have a small locker trunk in my room,” I
said. “Will you help take it down, Piani?” “We’ll take it,” Piani said. “Come on, Aldo.”
He went off into the hall with Bonello. I heard them going upstairs. “This was a fine
place,” Bartolomeo Aymo said. He put two bottles of wine and half a cheese into his
haversack. “There won’t be a place like this again. Where will they retreat to,
Tenente?” “Beyond the Tagliamento, they say. The hospital and the sector are to be
at Pordenone.” “This is a better town than Pordenone.” “I don’t know Pordenone,” I
said. “I’ve just been through there.” “It’s not much of a place,” Aymo said.
28
As we moved out through the town it was empty in the rain and the dark except for
columns of troops and guns that were going through the main street. There were
many trucks too and some carts going through on other streets and converging on
the main road. When we were out past the tanneries onto the main road the troops,
the motor trucks, the horse-drawn carts and the guns were in one wide slow-moving
column. We moved slowly but steadily in the rain, the radiator cap of our car almost
against the tailboard of a truck that was loaded high, the load covered with wet
canvas. Then the truck stopped. The whole column was stopped. It started again
and we went a little farther, then stopped. I got out and walked ahead, going
between the trucks and carts and under the wet necks of the horses. The block was
farther ahead. I left the road, crossed the ditch on a footboard and walked along the
field beyond the ditch. I could see the stalled column between the trees in the rain as
I went forward across from it in the field. I went about a mile. The column did not
move, although, on the other side beyond the stalled vehicles I could see the troops
moving. I went back to the cars. This block might extend as far as Udine. Piani was
asleep over the wheel. I climbed up beside him and went to sleep too. Several hours
later I heard the truck ahead of us grinding into gear. I woke Piani and we started,
moving a few yards, then stopping, then going on again. It was still raining. The
column stalled again in the night and did not start. I got down and went back to see
Aymo and Bonello. Bonello had two sergeants of engineers on the seat of his car
with him. They stiffened when I came up. “They were left to do something to a
bridge,” Bonello said. “They can’t find their unit so I gave them a ride.” “With the Sir
Lieutenant’s permission.” “With permission,” I said. “The lieutenant is an American,”
Bonello said. “He’ll give anybody a ride.” One of the sergeants smiled. The other
asked Bonello if I was an Italian from North or South America. “He’s not an Italian.
He’s North American English.” The sergeants were polite but did not believe it. I left
them and went back to Aymo. He had two girls on the seat with him and was sitting
back in the corner and smoking. “Barto, Barto,” I said. He laughed. “Talk to them,
Tenente,” he said. “I can’t understand them. Hey!” He put his hand on the girl’s thigh
and squeezed it in a friendly way. The girl drew her shawl tight around her and
pushed his hand away. “Hey!” he said. “Tell the Tenente your name and what you’re
doing here.” The girl looked at me fiercely. The other girl kept her eyes down. The
girl who looked at me said something in a dialect I could not understand a word of.
She was plump and
“A Farewell to Arms” By Ernest Hemingway 84
dark and looked about sixteen. “Sorella?” I asked and pointed at the other girl. She
nodded her head and smiled. “All right,” I said and patted her knee. I felt her stiffen
away when I touched her. The sister never looked up. She looked perhaps a year
younger. Aymo put his hand on the elder girl’s thigh and she pushed it away. He
laughed at her. “Good man,” he pointed at himself. “Good man,” he pointed at me.
“Don’t you worry.” The girl looked at him fiercely. The pair of them were like two wild
birds. “What does she ride with me for if she doesn’t like me?” Aymo asked. “They
got right up in the car the minute I motioned to them.” He turned to the girl. “Don’t
worry,” he said. “No danger of —,” using the vulgar word. “No place for —.” I could
see she understood the word and that was all. Her eyes looked at him very scared.
She pulled the shawl tight. “Car all full,” Aymo said. “No danger of —— . No place for
—.” Every time he said the word the girl stiffened a little. Then sitting stiffly and
looking at him she began to cry. I saw her lips working and then tears came down
her plump cheeks. Her sister, not looking up, took her hand and they sat there
together. The older one, who had been so fierce, began to sob. “I guess I scared
her,” Aymo said. “I didn’t mean to scare her.” Bartolomeo brought out his knapsack
and cut off two pieces of cheese. “Here,” he said. “Stop crying.” The older girl shook
her head and still cried, but the younger girl took the cheese and commenced to eat.
After a while the younger girl gave her sister the second piece of cheese and they
both ate. The older sister still sobbed a little. “She’ll be all right after a while,” Aymo
said. An idea came to him. “Virgin?” he asked the girl next to him. She nodded her
head vigorously. “Virgin too?” he pointed to the sister. Both the girls nodded their
heads and the elder said something in dialect. “That’s all right,” Bartolomeo said.
“That’s all right.” Both the girls seemed cheered. I left them sitting together with
Aymo sitting back in the corner and went back to Piani’s car. The column of vehicles
did not move but the troops kept passing alongside. It was still raining hard and I
thought some of the stops in the movement of the column might be from cars with
wet wiring. More likely they were from horses or men going to sleep. Still, traffic
could tie up in cities when every one was awake. It was the combination of horse
and motor vehicles. They did not help each other any. The peasants’ carts did not
help much either. Those were a couple of fine girls with Barto. A retreat was no
place for two virgins. Real virgins. Probably very religious. If there were no war we
would probably all be in bed. In bed I lay me down my head. Bed and board. Stiff as
a board in bed. Catherine was in bed now between two sheets, over her and under
her. Which side did she sleep on? Maybe she wasn’t asleep. Maybe she was lying
thinking about me. Blow, blow, ye western wind. Well, it blew and it wasn’t the small
rain but the big rain down that rained. It rained all night. You knew it rained down that
rained. Look at it. Christ, that my love were in my arms and I in my bed again. That
my love Catherine. That my sweet love Catherine down might rain. Blow her again to
me. Well, we were in it. Every one was caught in it and the small rain would not quiet
it. “Good-night, Catherine,” I said out loud. “I hope you sleep well. If it’s too
uncomfortable, darling, lie on the other side,” I said. “I’ll get you some cold water. In
a little while it will be morning and then it won’t be so bad. I’m sorry he makes you so
uncomfortable. Try and go to sleep, sweet.” I was asleep all the time, she said.
You’ve been talking in your sleep. Are you all right? Are you really there? Of course
I’m here. I wouldn’t go away. This doesn’t make any difference between us. You’re
so lovely and sweet. You wouldn’t go away in the night, would you? Of course I
wouldn’t go away. I’m always here. I come whenever you want me. “—,” Piani said.
“They’ve started again.”

“A Farewell to Arms” By Ernest Hemingway 85

“I was dopey,” I said. I looked at my watch. It was three o’clock in the morning. I
reached back behind the seat for a bottle of the barbera. “You talked out loud,” Piani
said. “I was having a dream in English,” I said. The rain was slacking and we were
moving along. Before daylight we were stalled again and when it was light we were
at a little rise in the ground and I saw the road of the retreat stretched out far ahead,
everything stationary except for the infantry filtering through. We started to move
again but seeing the rate of progress in the daylight, I knew we were going to have
to get off that main road some way and go across country if we ever hoped to reach
Udine. In the night many peasants had joined the column from the roads of the
country and in the column there were carts loaded with household goods; there were
mirrors projecting up between mattresses, and chickens and ducks tied to carts.
There was a sewing machine on the cart ahead of us in the rain. They had saved the
most valuable things. On some carts the women sat huddled from the rain and
others walked beside the carts keeping as close to them as they could. There were
dogs now in the column, keeping under the wagons as they moved along. The road
was muddy, the ditches at the side were high with water and beyond the trees that
lined the road the fields looked too wet and too soggy to try to cross. I got down from
the car and worked up the road a way, looking for a place where I could see ahead
to find a side-road we could take across country. I knew there were many side-roads
but did not want one that would lead to nothing. I could not remember them because
we had always passed them bowling along in the car on the main road and they all
looked much alike. Now I knew we must find one if we hoped to get through. No one
knew where the Austrians were nor how things were going but I was certain that if
the rain should stop and planes come over and get to work on that column that it
would be all over. All that was needed was for a few men to leave their trucks or a
few horses be killed to tie up completely the movement on the road. The rain was
not falling so heavily now and I thought it might clear. I went ahead along the edge of
the road and when there was a small road that led off to the north between two fields
with a hedge of trees on both sides, I thought that we had better take it and hurried
back to the cars. I told Piani to turn off and went back to tell Bonello and Aymo. “If it
leads nowhere we can turn around and cut back in,” I said. “What about these?”
Bonello asked. His two sergeants were beside him on the seat. They were unshaven
but still military looking in the early morning. “They’ll be good to push,” I said. I went
back to Aymo and told him we were going to try it across country. “What about my
virgin family?” Aymo asked. The two girls were asleep. “They won’t be very useful,” I
said. “You ought to have some one that could push.” “They could go back in the car,”
Aymo said. “There’s room in the car.” “All right if you want them,” I said. “Pick up
somebody with a wide back to push.” “Bersaglieri,” Aymo smiled. “They have the
widest backs. They measure them. How do you feel, Tenente?” “Fine. How are
you?” “Fine. But very hungry.” “There ought to be something up that road and we will
stop and eat.” “How’s your leg, Tenente?” “Fine,” I said. Standing on the step and
looking up ahead I could see Piani’s car pulling out onto the little side-road and
starting up it, his car showing through the hedge of bare branches. Bonello turned off
and followed him and then Piani worked his way out and we followed the two
ambulances ahead along the narrow road between hedges. It led to a farmhouse.
We found Piani and Bonello stopped in the farmyard. The house was low and long
with a trellis with a grape-vine over the door. There was a well in the yard and Piani
was getting up water to fill his radiator. So much going in low gear had boiled it out.
The farmhouse was deserted. I looked back down the road, the farmhouse

“A Farewell to Arms” By Ernest Hemingway 86

was on a slight elevation above the plain, and we could see over the country, and
saw the road, the hedges, the fields and the line of trees along the main road where
the retreat was passing. The two sergeants were looking through the house. The
girls were awake and looking at the courtyard, the well and the two big ambulances
in front of the farmhouse, with three drivers at the well. One of the sergeants came
out with a clock in his hand. “Put it back,” I said. He looked at me, went in the house
and came back without the clock. “Where’s your partner?” I asked. “He’s gone to the
latrine.” He got up on the seat of the ambulance. He was afraid we would leave him.
“What about breakfast, Tenente?” Bonello asked. “We could eat something. It
wouldn’t take very long.” “Do you think this road going down on the other side will
lead to anything?” “Sure.” “All right. Let’s eat.” Piani and Bonello went in the house.
“Come on,” Aymo said to the girls. He held his hand to help them down. The older
sister shook her head. They were not going into any deserted house. They looked
after us. “They are difficult,” Aymo said. We went into the farmhouse together. It was
large and dark, an abandoned feeling. Bonello and Piani were in the kitchen.
“There’s not much to eat,” Piani said. “They’ve cleaned it out.” Bonello sliced a big
cheese on the heavy kitchen table. “Where was the cheese?” “In the cellar. Piani
found wine too and apples.” “That’s a good breakfast.” Piani was taking the wooden
cork out of a big wicker-covered wine jug. He tipped it and poured a copper pan full.
“It smells all right,” he said. “Find some beakers, Barto.” The two sergeants came in.
“Have some cheese, sergeants,” Bonello said. “We should go,” one of the sergeants
said, eating his cheese and drinking a cup of wine. “We’ll go. Don’t worry,” Bonello
said. “An army travels on its stomach,” I said. “What?” asked the sergeant. “It’s
better to eat.” “Yes. But time is precious.” “I believe the bastards have eaten
already,” Piani said. The sergeants looked at him. They hated the lot of us. “You
know the road?” one of them asked me. “No,” I said. They looked at each other. “We
would do best to start,” the first one said. “We are starting,” I said. I drank another
cup of the red wine. It tasted very good after the cheese and apple. “Bring the
cheese,” I said and went out. Bonello came out carrying the great jug of wine. “That’s
too big,” I said. He looked at it regretfully. “I guess it is,” he said. “Give me the
canteens to fill.” He filled the canteens and some of the wine ran out on the stone
paving of the courtyard. Then he picked up the wine jug and put it just inside the
door. “The Austrians can find it without breaking the door down,” he said. “We’ll roll.”
I said. “Piani and I will go ahead.” The two engineers were already on the seat
beside Bonello. The girls were eating cheese and apples. Aymo was smoking. We
started off down the narrow road. I looked back at the two cars coming and the

“A Farewell to Arms” By Ernest Hemingway 87

farmhouse. It was a fine, low, solid stone house and the ironwork of the well was
very good. Ahead of us the road was narrow and muddy and there was a high hedge
on either side. Behind, the cars were following closely.
29
At noon we were stuck in a muddy road about, as nearly as we could figure, ten
kilometres from Udine. The rain had stopped during the forenoon and three times we
had heard planes coming, seen them pass overhead, watched them go far to the left
and heard them bombing on the main highroad. We had worked through a network
of secondary roads and had taken many roads that were blind, but had always, by
backing up and finding another road, gotten closer to Udine. Now, Aymo’s car, in
backing so that we might get out of a blind road, had gotten into the soft earth at the
side and the wheels, spinning, had dug deeper and deeper until the car rested on its
differential. The thing to do now was to dig out in front of the wheels, put in brush so
that the chains could grip, and then push until the car was on the road. We were all
down on the road around the car. The two sergeants looked at the car and examined
the wheels. Then they started off down the road without a word. I went after them.
“Come on,” I said. “Cut some brush.” “We have to go,” one said. “Get busy,” I said,
“and cut brush.” “We have to go,” one said. The other said nothing. They were in a
hurry to start. They would not look at me. “I order you to come back to the car and
cut brush,” I said. The one sergeant turned. “We have to go on. In a little while you
will be cut off. You can’t order us. You’re not our officer.” “I order you to cut brush,” I
said. They turned and started down the road. “Halt,” I said. They kept on down the
muddy road, the hedge on either side. “I order you to halt,” I called. They went a little
faster. I opened up my holster, took the pistol, aimed at the one who had talked the
most, and fired. I missed and they both started to run. I shot three times and dropped
one. The other went through the hedge and was out of sight. I fired at him through
the hedge as he ran across the field. The pistol clicked empty and I put in another
clip. I saw it was too far to shoot at the second sergeant. He was far across the field,
running, his head held low. I commenced to reload the empty clip. Bonello came up.
“Let me go finish him,” he said. I handed him the pistol and he walked down to where
the sergeant of engineers lay face down across the road. Bonello leaned over, put
the pistol against the man’s head and pulled the trigger. The pistol did not fire. “You
have to cock it,” I said. He cocked it and fired twice. He took hold of the sergeant’s
legs and pulled him to the side of the road so he lay beside the hedge. He came
back and handed me the pistol. “The son of a bitch,” he said. He looked toward the
sergeant. “You see me shoot him, Tenente?” “We’ve got to get the brush quickly,” I
said. “Did I hit the other one at all?” “I don’t think so,” Aymo said. “He was too far
away to hit with a pistol.” “The dirty scum,” Piani said. We were all cutting twigs and
branches. Everything had been taken out of the car. Bonello was digging out in front
of the wheels. When we were ready Aymo started the car and put it into gear. The
wheels spun round throwing brush and mud. Bonello and I pushed until we could
feel our joints crack. The car would not move. “Rock her back and forth, Barto,” I
said. He drove the engine in reverse, then forward. The wheels only dug in deeper.
Then the car was resting on the differential again, and the wheels spun freely in the
holes they had dug. I straightened up. “We’ll try her with a rope,” I said.
“A Farewell to Arms” By Ernest Hemingway 88
“I don’t think it’s any use, Tenente. You can’t get a straight pull.” “We have to try it,” I
said. “She won’t come out any other way.” Piani’s and Bonello’s cars could only
move straight ahead down the narrow road. We roped both cars together and pulled.
The wheels only pulled sideways against the ruts. “It’s no good,” I shouted. “Stop it.”
Piani and Bonello got down from their cars and came back. Aymo got down. The
girls were up the road about forty yards sitting on a stone wall. “What do you say,
Tenente?” Bonello asked. “We’ll dig out and try once more with the brush,” I said. I
looked down the road. It was my fault. I had led them up here. The sun was almost
out from behind the clouds and the body of the sergeant lay beside the hedge. “We’ll
put his coat and cape under,” I said. Bonello went to get them. I cut brush and Aymo
and Piani dug out in front and between the wheels. I cut the cape, then ripped it in
two, and laid it under the wheel in the mud, then piled brush for the wheels to catch.
We were ready to start and Aymo got up on the seat and started the car. The wheels
spun and we pushed and pushed. But it wasn’t any use. “It’s —ed,” I said. “Is there
anything you want in the car, Barto?” Aymo climbed up with Bonello, carrying the
cheese and two bottles of wine and his cape. Bonello, sitting behind the wheel, was
looking through the pockets of the sergeant’s coat. “Better throw the coat away,” I
said. “What about Barto’s virgins?” “They can get in the back,” Piani said. “I don’t
think we are going far.” I opened the back door of the ambulance. “Come on,” I said.
“Get in.” The two girls climbed in and sat in the corner. They seemed to have taken
no notice of the shooting. I looked back up the road. The sergeant lay in his dirty
long-sleeved underwear. I got up with Piani and we started. We were going to try to
cross the field. When the road entered the field I got down and walked ahead. If we
could get across, there was a road on the other side. We could not get across. It was
too soft and muddy for the cars. When they were finally and completely stalled, the
wheels dug in to the hubs, we left them in the field and started on foot for Udine.
When we came to the road which led back toward the main highway I pointed down
it to the two girls. “Go down there,” I said. “You’ll meet people.” They looked at me. I
took out my pocket-book and gave them each a ten-lira note. “Go down there,” I
said, pointing. “Friends! Family!” They did not understand but they held the money
tightly and started down the road. They looked back as though they were afraid I
might take the money back. I watched them go down the road, their shawls close
around them, looking back apprehensively at us. The three drivers were laughing.
“How much will you give me to go in that direction, Tenente?” Bonello asked.
“They’re better off in a bunch of people than alone if they catch them,” I said. “Give
me two hundred lire and I’ll walk straight back toward Austria,” Bonello said. “They’d
take it away from you,” Piani said. “Maybe the war will be over,” Aymo said. We were
going up the road as fast as we could. The sun was trying to come through. Beside
the road were mulberry trees. Through the trees I could see our two big moving-vans
of cars stuck in the field. Piani looked back too. “They’ll have to build a road to get
them out,” he said. “I wish to Christ we had bicycles,” Bonello said. “Do they ride
bicycles in America?” Aymo asked. “They used to.” “Here it is a great thing,” Aymo
said. “A bicycle is a splendid thing.” “I wish to Christ we had bicycles,” Bonello said.
“I’m no walker.” “Is that firing?” I asked. I thought I could hear firing a long way away.

“A Farewell to Arms” By Ernest Hemingway 89

“I don’t know,” Aymo said. He listened. “I think so,” I said. “The first thing we will see
will be the cavalry,” Piani said. “I don’t think they’ve got any cavalry.” “I hope to
Christ not,” Bonello said. “I don’t want to be stuck on a lance by any—cavalry.” “You
certainly shot that sergeant, Tenente,” Piani said. We were walking fast. “I killed
him,” Bonello said. “I never killed anybody in this war, and all my life I’ve wanted to
kill a sergeant.” “You killed him on the sit all right,” Piani said. “He wasn’t flying very
fast when you killed him.” “Never mind. That’s one thing I can always remember. I
killed that—of a sergeant.” “What will you say in confession?” Aymo asked. “I’ll say,
‘Bless me, father, I killed a sergeant.” They all laughed. “He’s an anarchist,” Piani
said. “He doesn’t go to church.” “Piani’s an anarchist too,” Bonello said. “Are you
really anarchists?” I asked. “No, Tenente. We’re socialists. We come from Imola.”
“Haven’t you ever been there?” “No.” “By Christ it’s a fine place, Tenente. You come
there after the war and we’ll show you something.” “Are you all socialists?”
“Everybody.” “Is it a fine town?” “Wonderful. You never saw a town like that.” “How
did you get to be socialists?” “We’re all socialists. Everybody is a socialist. We’ve
always been socialists.” “You come, Tenente. We’ll make you a socialist too.” Ahead
the road turned off to the left and there was a little hill and, beyond a stone wall, an
apple orchard. As the road went uphill they ceased talking. We walked along
together all going fast against time.
30
Later we were on a road that led to a river. There was a long line of abandoned
trucks and carts on the road leading up to the bridge. No one was in sight. The river
was high and the bridge had been blown up in the centre; the stone arch was fallen
into the river and the brown water was going over it. We went on up the bank looking
for a place to cross. Up ahead I knew there was a railway bridge and I thought we
might be able to get across there. The path was wet and muddy. We did not see any
troops; only abandoned trucks and stores. Along the river bank there was nothing
and no one but the wet brush and muddy ground. We went up to the bank and finally
we saw the railway bridge. “What a beautiful bridge,” Aymo said. It was a long plain
iron bridge across what was usually a dry river-bed. “We’d better hurry and get
across before they blow it up,” I said. “There’s nobody to blow it up,” Piani said.
“They’re all gone.” “It’s probably mined,” Bonello said. “You cross first, Tenente.”
“Listen to the anarchist,” Aymo said. “Make him go first.” “I’ll go,” I said. “It won’t be
mined to blow up with one man.” “You see,” Piani said. “That is brains. Why haven’t
you brains, anarchist?” “If I had brains I wouldn’t be here,” Bonello said. “That’s
pretty good, Tenente,” Aymo said. “That’s pretty good,” I said. We were close to the
bridge now. The sky had clouded over again and it was raining a little. The bridge
looked long and solid. We climbed up
“A Farewell to Arms” By Ernest Hemingway 90

the embankment. “Come one at a time,” I said and started across the bridge. I
watched the ties and the rails for any trip-wires or signs of explosive but I saw
nothing. Down below the gaps in the ties the river ran muddy and fast. Ahead across
the wet countryside I could see Udine in the rain. Across the bridge I looked back.
Just up the river was another bridge. As I watched, a yellow mud-colored motor car
crossed it. The sides of the bridge were high and the body of the car, once on, was
out of sight. But I saw the heads of the driver, the man on the seat with him, and the
two men on the rear seat. They all wore German helmets. Then the car was over the
bridge and out of sight behind the trees and the abandoned vehicles on the road. I
waved to Aymo who was crossing and to the others to come on. I climbed down and
crouched beside the railway embankment. Aymo came down with me. “Did you see
the car?” I asked. “No. We were watching you.” “A German staff car crossed on the
upper bridge.” “A staff car?” “Yes.” “Holy Mary.” The others came and we all
crouched in the mud behind the embankment, looking across the rails at the bridge,
the line of trees, the ditch and the road. “Do you think we’re cut off then, Tenente?” “I
don’t know. All I know is a German staff car went along that road.” “You don’t feel
funny, Tenente? You haven’t got strange feelings in the head?” “Don’t be funny,
Bonello.” “What about a drink?” Piani asked. “If we’re cut off we might as well have a
drink.” He unhooked his canteen and uncorked it. “Look! Look!” Aymo said and
pointed toward the road. Along the top of the stone bridge we could see German
helmets moving. They were bent forward and moved smoothly, almost supernatu
rally, along. As they came off the bridge we saw them. They were bicycle troops. I
saw the faces of the first two. They were ruddy and healthy-looking. Their helmets
came iow down over their foreheads and the side of their faces. Their carbines were
clipped to the frame of the bicycles. Stick bombs hung handle down from their belts.
Their helmets and their gray uniforms were wet and they rode easily, looking ahead
and to both sides. There were two—then four in line, then two, then almost a dozen;
then another dozen— then one alone. They did not talk but we could not have heard
them because of the noise from the river. They were gone out of sight up the road.
“Holy Mary,” Aymo said. “They were Germans,” Piani said. “Those weren’t
Austrians.” “Why isn’t there somebody here to stop them?” I said. “Why haven’t they
blown the bridge up? Why aren’t there machine-guns along this embankment?” “You
tell us, Tenente,” Bonello said. I was very angry. “The whole bloody thing is crazy.
Down below they blow up a little bridge. Here they leave a bridge on the main road.
Where is everybody? Don’t they try and stop them at all?” “You tell us, Tenente,”
Bonello said. I shut up. It was none of my business; all I had to do was to get to
Pordenone with three ambulances. I had failed at that. All I had to do now was get to
Pordenone. I probably could not even get to Udine. The hell I couldn’t. The thing to
do was to be calm and not get shot or captured. “Didn’t you have a canteen open?” I
asked Piani. He handed it to me. I took a long drink. “We might as well start,” I said.
“There’s no hurry though. Do you want to eat something?” “This is no place to stay,”
Bonello said. “All right. We’ll start.”

“A Farewell to Arms” By Ernest Hemingway 91

“Should we keep on this side—out of sight?” “We’d be better off on top. They may
come along this bridge too. We don’t want them on top of us before we see them.”
We walked along the railroad track. On both sides of us stretched the wet plain.
Ahead across the plain was the hill of Udine. The roofs fell away from the castle on
the hill. We could see the campanile and the clock-tower. There were many mulberry
trees in the fields. Ahead I saw a place where the rails were torn up. The ties had
been dug out too and thrown down the embankment. “Down! down!” Aymo said. We
dropped down beside the embankment. There was another group of bicyclists
passing along the road. I looked over the edge and saw them go on. “They saw us
but they went on,” Aymo said. “We’ll get killed up there, Tenente,” Bonello said.
“They don’t want us,” I said. “They’re after something else. We’re in more danger if
they should come on us suddenly.” “I’d rather walk here out of sight,” Bonello said.
“All right. We’ll walk along the tracks.” “Do you think we can get through?” Aymo
asked. “Sure. There aren’t very many of them yet. We’ll go through in the dark.”
“What was that staff car doing?” “Christ knows,” I said. We kept on up the tracks.
Bonello tired of walking in the mud of the embankment and came up with the rest of
us. The railway moved south away from the highway now and we could not see what
passed along the road. A short bridge over a canal was blown up but we climbed
across on what was left of the span. We heard firing ahead of us. We came up on
the railway beyond the canal. It went on straight toward the town across the low
fields. We could see the line of the other railway ahead of us. To the north was the
main road where we had seen the cyclists; to the south there was a small branchroad across the fields with thick trees on each side. I thought we had better cut to the
south and work around the town that way and across country toward Campoformio
and the main road to the Tagliamento. We could avoid the main line of the retreat by
keeping to the secondary roads beyond Udine. I knew there were plenty of sideroads across the plain. I started down the embankment. “Come on,” I said. We would
make for the side-road and work to the south of the town. We all started down the
embankment. A shot was fired at us from the side-road. The bullet went into the mud
of the embankment. “Go on back,” I shouted. I started up the embankment, slipping
in the mud. The drivers were ahead of me. I went up the embankment as fast as I
could go. Two more shots came from the thick brush and Aymo, as he was crossing
the tracks, lurched, tripped and fell face down. We pulled him down on the other side
and turned him over. “His head ought to be uphill,” I said. Piani moved him around.
He lay in the mud on the side of the embankment, his feet pointing downhill,
breathing blood irregularly. The three of us squatted over him in the rain. He was hit
low in the back of the neck and the bullet had ranged upward and come out under
the right eye. He died while I was stopping up the two holes. Piani laid his head
down, wiped at his face, with a piece of the emergency dressing, then let it alone.
“The —,” he said. “They weren’t Germans,” I said. “There can’t be any Germans over
there.” “Italians,” Piani said, using the word as an epithet, “Italiani!” Bonello said
nothing. He was sitting beside Aymo, not looking at him. Piani picked up Aymo’s cap
where it had rolled down the embankment and put it over his face. He took out his
canteen. “Do you want a drink?” Piani handed Bonello the canteen. “No,” Bonello
said. He turned to me. “That might have happened to us any time on the railway
tracks.” “No,” I said. “It was because we started across the field.”

“A Farewell to Arms” By Ernest Hemingway 92

Bonello shook his head. “Aymo’s dead,” he said. “Who’s dead next, Tenente? Where
do we go now?” “Those were Italians that shot,” I said. “They weren’t Germans.” “I
suppose if they were Germans they’d have killed all of us,” Bonello said. “We are in
more danger from Italians than Germans,” I said. “The rear guard are afraid of
everything. The Germans know what they’re after.” “You reason it out, Tenente,”
Bonello said. “Where do we go now?” Piani asked. “We better lie up some place till
it’s dark. If we could get south we’d be all right.” “They’d have to shoot us all to prove
they were right the first time,” Bonello said. “I’m not going to try them.” “We’ll find a
place to lie up as near to Udine as we can get and then go through when it’s dark.”
“Let’s go then,” Bonello said. We went down the north side of the embankment. I
looked back. Aymo lay in the mud with the angle of the embankment. He was quite
small and his arms were by his side, his puttee-wrapped legs and muddy boots
together, his cap over his face. He looked very dead. It was raining. I had liked him
as well as any one I ever knew. I had his papers in my pocket and would write to his
family. Ahead across the fields was a farmhouse. There were trees around it and the
farm buildings were built against the house. There was a balcony along the second
floor held up by columns. “We better keep a little way apart,” I said. “I’ll go ahead.” I
started toward the farmhouse. There was a path across the field. Crossing the field, I
did not know but that some one would fire on us from the trees near the farmhouse
or from the farmhouse itself. I walked toward it, seeing it very clearly. The balcony of
the second floor merged into the barn and there was hay coming Out between the
columns. The courtyard was of stone blocks and all the trees were dripping with the
rain. There was a big empty twowheeled cart, the shafts tipped high up in the rain. I
came to the courtyard, crossed it, and stood under the shelter of the balcony. The
door of the house was open and I went in. Bonello and Piani came in after me. It was
dark inside. I went back to the kitchen. There were ashes of a fire on the big open
hearth. The pots hung over the ashes, but they were empty. I looked around but I
could not find anything to eat. “We ought to lie up in the barn,” I said. “Do you think
you could find anything to eat, Piani, and bring it up there?” “I’ll look,” Piani said. “I’ll
look too,” Bonello said. “All right,” I said. “I’ll go up and look at the barn.” I found a
stone stairway that went up from the stable underneath. The stable smelt dry and
pleasant in the rain. The cattle were all gone, probably driven off when they left. The
barn was half full of hay. There were two windows in the roof, one was blocked with
boards, the other was a narrow dormer window on the north side. There was a chute
so that hay might be pitched down to the cattle. Beams crossed the opening down
into the main floor where the hay-carts drove in when the hay was hauled in to be
pitched up. I heard the rain on the roof and smelled the hay and, when I went down,
the clean smell of dried dung in the stable. We could pry a board loose and see out
of the south window down into the courtyard. The other window looked out on the
field toward the north. We could get out of either window onto the roof and down, or
go down the hay chute if the stairs were impractical. It was a big barn and we could
hide in the hay if we heard any one. It seemed like a good place. I was sure we
could have gotten through to the south if they had not fired on us. It was impossible
that there were Germans there. They were coming from the north and down the road
from Cividale. They could not have come through from the south. The Italians were
even more dangerous. They were frightened and firing on anything they saw. Last
night on the retreat we had heard that there had been many Germans in Italian
uniforms mixing with the retreat in the north. I did not believe it. That was one of
those things you

“A Farewell to Arms” By Ernest Hemingway 93

always heard in the war. It was one of the things the enemy always did to you. You
did not know any one who went over in German uniform to confuse them. Maybe
they did but it sounded difficult. I did not believe the Germans did it. I did not believe
they had to. There was no need to confuse our retreat. The size of the army and the
fewness of the roads did that. Nobody gave any orders, let alone Germans. Still,
they would shoot us for Germans. They shot Aymo. The hay smelled good and lying
in a barn in the hay took away all the years in between. We had lain in hay and
talked and shot sparrows with an air-rifle when they perched in the triangle cut high
up in the wall of the barn. The barn was gone now and one year they had cut the
hemlock woods and there were only stumps, dried tree-tops, branches and fireweed
where the woods had been. You could not go back. If you did not go forward what
happened? You never got back to Milan. And if you got back to Milan what
happened? I listened to the firing to the north toward Udine. I could hear machinegun firing. There was no shelling. That was something. They must have gotten some
troops along the road. I looked down in the half-light of the hay-barn and saw Piani
standing on the hauling floor. He had a long sausage, a jar of something and two
bottles of wine under his arm. “Come up,” I said. “There is the ladder.” Then I
realized that I should help him with the things and went down. I was vague in the
head from lying in the hay. I had been nearly asleep. “Where’s Bonello?” I asked. “I’ll
tell you,” Piani said. We went up the ladder. Up on the hay we set the things down.
Piani took out his knife with the corkscrew and drew the cork on a wine bottle. “They
have sealing-wax on it,” he said. “It must be good.” He smiled. “Where’s Bonello?” I
asked. Piani looked at me. “He went away, Tenente,” he said. “He wanted to be a
prisoner.” I did not say anything. “He was afraid we would get killed.” I held the bottle
of wine and did not say anything. “You see we don’t believe in the war anyway,
Tenente.” “Why didn’t you go?” I asked. “I did not want to leave you.” “Where did he
go?” “I don’t know, Tenente. He went away.” “All right,” I said. “Will you cut the
sausage?” Piani looked at me in the half-light. “I cut it while we were talking,” he
said. We sat in the hay and ate the sausage and drank the wine. It must have been
wine they had saved for a wedding. It was so old that it was losing its color. “You
look out of this window, Luigi,” I said. “I’ll go look out the other window.” We had
each been drinking out of one of the bottles and I took my bottle with me and went
over and lay flat on the hay and looked out the narrow window at the wet country. I
do not know what I expected to see but I did not see anything except the fields and
the bare mulberry trees and the rain falling. I drank the wine and it did not make me
feel good. They had kept it too long and it had gone to pieces and lost its quality and
color. I watched it get dark outside; the darkness came very quickly. It would be a
black night with the rain. When it was dark there was no use watching any more, so I
went over to Piani. He was lying asleep and I did not wake him but sat down beside
him for a while. He was a big man and he slept heavily. After a while I woke him and
we started. That was a very strange night. I do not know what I had expected, death
perhaps and shooting in the dark and running, but nothing happened. We waited,
lying flat beyond the ditch along the main road while a German battalion passed,
then when they were gone we crossed the road and went on to the north. We were
very close to Germans twice in the rain but they did not see us. We got past the town
to the north without

“A Farewell to Arms” By Ernest Hemingway 94

seeing any Italians, then after a while came on the main channels of the retreat and
walked all night toward the Tagliamento. I had not realized how gigantic the retreat
was. The whole country was moving, as well as the army. We walked all night,
making better time than the vehicles. My leg ached and I was tired but we made
good time. It seemed so silly for Bonello to have decided to be taken prisoner. There
was no danger. We had walked through two armies without incident. If Aymo had not
been killed there would never have seemed to be any danger. No one had bothered
us when we were in plain sight along the railway. The killing came suddenly and
unreasonably. I wondered where Bonello was. “How do you feel, Tenente?” Piani
asked. We were going along the side of a road crowded with vehicles and troops.
“Fine.” “I’m tired of this walking.” “Well, all we have to do is walk now. We don’t have
to worry.” “Bonello was a fool.” “He was a fool all right.” “What will you do about him,
Tenente?” “I don’t know.” “Can’t you just put him down as taken prisoner?” “I don’t
know.” “You see if the war went on they would make bad trouble for his family.” “The
war won’t go on,” a soldier said. “We’re going home. The war is over.” “Everybody’s
going home.” “We’re all going home.” “Come on, Tenente,” Piani said. He wanted to
get past them. “Tenente? Who’s a Tenente? A basso gli ufficiali! Down with the
officers!” Piani took me by the arm. “I better call you by your name,” he said. “They
might try and make trouble. They’ve shot some officers.” We worked up past them. “I
won’t make a report that will make trouble for his family.” I went on with our
conversation. “If the war is over it makes no difference,” Piani said. “But I don’t
believe it’s over. It’s too good that it should be over.” “We’ll know pretty soon,” I said.
“I don’t believe it’s over. They all think it’s over but I don’t believe it.” “Viva la Pace!” a
soldier shouted out. “We’re going home!” “It would be fine if we all went home,” Piani
said. “Wouldn’t you like to go home?” “Yes.” “We’ll never go. I don’t think it’s over.”
“Andiamo a casa!” a soldier shouted. “They throw away their rifles,” Piani said. “They
take them off and drop them down while they’re marching. Then they shout.” “They
ought to keep their rifles.” “They think if they throw away their rifles they can’t make
them fight.” In the dark and the rain, making our way along the side of the road I
could see that many of the troops still had their rifles. They stuck up above the
capes. “What brigade are you?” an officer called out. “Brigata di Pace,” some one
shouted. “Peace Brigade!” The officer said nothing. “What does he say? What does
the officer say?” “Down with the officer. Viva la Pace!” “Come on,” Piani said. We
passed two British ambulances, abandoned in the block of vehicles. “They’re from
Gorizia,” Piani said. “I know the cars.” “They got further than we did.” “They started
earlier.” “I wonder where the drivers are?”

“A Farewell to Arms” By Ernest Hemingway 95

“Up ahead probably.” “The Germans have stopped outside Udine,” I said. “These
people will all get across the river.” “Yes,” Piani said. “That’s why I think the war will
go on.” “The Germans could come on,” I said. “I wonder why they don’t come on.” “I
don’t know. I don’t know anything about this kind of war.” “They have to wait for their
transport I suppose.” “I don’t know,” Piani said. Alone he was much gentler. When he
was with the others he Was a very rough talker. “Are you married, Luigi?” “You know
I am married.” “Is that why you did not want to be a prisoner?” “That is one reason.
Are you married, Tenente?” “No.” “Neither is Bonello.” “You can’t tell anything by a
man’s being married. But I should think a married man would want to get back to his
wife,” I said. I would be glad to talk about wives. “Yes.” “How are your feet?” “They’re
sore enough.” Before daylight we reached the bank of the Tagliamento and followed
down along the flooded river to the bridge where all the traffic was crossing. “They
ought to be able to hold at this river,” Piani said. In the dark the flood looked high.
The water swirled and it was wide. The wooden bridge was nearly three-quarters of
a mile across, and the river, that usually ran in narrow channels in the wide stony
bed far below the bridge, was close under the wooden planking. We went along the
bank and then worked our way into the crowd that were crossing the bridge.
Crossing slowly in the rain a few feet above the flood, pressed tight in the crowd, the
box of an artillery caisson just ahead, I looked over the side and watched the river.
Now that we could not go our own pace I felt very tired. There was no exhilaration in
crossing the bridge. I wondered what it would be like if a plane bombed it in the
daytime. “Piani,” I said. “Here I am, Tenente.” He was a little ahead in the jam. No
one was talking. They were all trying to get across as soon as they could: thinking
only of that. We were almost across. At the far end of the bridge there were officers
and carabinieri standing on both sides flashing lights. I saw them silhouetted against
the sky-line. As we came close to them I saw one of the officers point to a man in the
column. A carabiniere went in after him and came out holding the man by the arm.
He took him away from the road. We came almost opposite them. The officers were
scrutinizing every one in the column, sometimes speaking to each other, going
forward to flash a light in some one’s face. They took some one else out just before
we came opposite. I saw the man. He was a lieutenantcolonel. I saw the stars in the
box on his sleeve as they flashed a light on him. His hair was gray and he was short
and fat. The carabiniere pulled him in behind the line of officers. As we came
opposite I saw one or two of them look at me. Then one pointed at me and spoke to
a carabiniere. I saw the carabiniere start for me, come through the edge of the
column toward me, then felt him take me by the collar. “What’s the matter with you?”
I said and hit him in the face. I saw his face under the hat, upturned mustaches and
blood coming down his cheek. Another one dove in toward us. “What’s the matter
with you?” I said. He did not answer. He was watching a chance to grab me. I put my
arm behind me to loosen my pistol. “Don’t you know you can’t touch an officer?” The
other one grabbed me from behind and pulled my arm up so that it twisted in the
socket. I turned with him and the other one grabbed me around the neck. I kicked his
shins and got my left knee into his groin.

“A Farewell to Arms” By Ernest Hemingway 96

“Shoot him if he resists,” I heard some one say. “What’s the meaning of this?” Itried
to shout but my voice was not very loud. They had me at the side of the road now.
“Shoot him if he resists,” an officer said. “Take him over back.” “Who are you?”
“You’ll find out.” “Who are you?” “Battle police,” another officer said. “Why don’t you
ask me to step over instead of having one of these airplanes grab me?” They did not
answer. They did not have to answer. They were battle police. “Take him back there
with the others,” the first officer said. “You see. He speaks Italian with an accent.”
“So do you, you ,” I said. “Take him back with the others,” the first officer said. They
took me down behind the line of officers below the road toward a group of people in
a field by the river bank. As we walked toward them shots were fired. I saw flashes
of the rifles and heard the reports. We came up to the group. There were four
officers standing together, with a man in front of them with a carabiniere on each
side of him. A group of men were standing guarded by carabinieri. Four other
carabinieri stood near the questioning officers, leaning on their carbines. They were
wide-hatted carabinieri. The two who had me shoved me in with the group waiting to
be questioned. I looked at the man the officers were questioning. He was the fat
gray-haired little lieutenant-colonel they had taken out of the column. The
questioners had all the efficiency, coldness and command of themselves of Italians
who are firing and are not being fired on. “Your brigade?” He told them. “Regiment?”
He told them. “Why are you not with your regiment?” He told them. “Do you not know
that an officer should be with his troops?” He did. That was all. Another officer
spoke. “It is you and such as you that have let the barbarians onto the sacred soil of
the fatherland.” “I beg your pardon,” said the lieutenant-colonel. “It is because of
treachery such as yours that we have lost the fruits of victory.” “Have you ever been
in a retreat?” the lieutenant-colonel asked. “Italy should never retreat.” We stood
there in the rain and listened to this. We were facing the officers and the prisoner
stood in front and a little to one side of us. “If you are going to shoot me,” the
lieutenant-colonel said, “please shoot me at once without further questioning. The
questioning is stupid.” He made the sign of the cross. The officers spoke together.
One wrote something on a pad of paper. “Abandoned his troops, ordered to be shot,”
he said. Two carabinieri took the lieutenant-colonel to the river bank. He walked in
the rain, an old man with his hat off, a carabinieri on either side. I did not watch them
shoot him but I heard the shots. They were questioning some one else. This officer
too was separated from his troops. He was not allowed to make an explanation. He
cried when they read the sentence from the pad of paper, and they were questioning
another when they shot him. They made a point of being intent on questioning the
next man while the man who had been questioned before was being shot. In this
way there was obviously nothing they could do about it. I did not know whether I
should wait to be questioned or make a break now. I was obviously a German in
Italian uniform. I saw how their minds worked; if they had minds and if they worked.
They were all young men and they were saving their

“A Farewell to Arms” By Ernest Hemingway 97

country. The second army was being re-formed beyond the Tagliamento. They were
executing officers of the rank of major and above who were separated from their
troops. They were also dealing summarily with German agitators in Italian uniform.
They wore steel helmets. Only two of us had steel helmets. Some of the carabinieri
had them. The other carabinieri wore the wide hat. Airplanes we called them. We
stood in the rain and were taken out one at a time to be questioned and shot. So far
they had shot every one they had questioned. The questioners had that beautiful
detachment and devotion to stern justice of men dealing in death without being in
any danger of it. They were questioning a full colonel of a line regiment. Three more
officers had just been put in with us. “Where was his regiment?” I looked at the
carabinieri. They were looking at the newcomers. The others were looking at the
colonel. I ducked down, pushed between two men, and ran for the river, my head
down. I tripped at the edge and went in with a splash. The water was very cold and I
stayed under as long as I could. I could feel the current swirl me and I stayed under
until I thought I could never come up. The minute I came up I took a breath and went
down again. It was easy to stay under with so much clothing and my boots. When I
came up the second time I saw a piece of timber ahead of me and reached it and
held on with one hand. I kept my head behind it and did not even look over it. I did
not want to see the bank. There were shots when I ran and shots when I came up
the first time. I heard them when I was almost above water. There were no shots
now. The piece of timber swung in the current and I held it with one hand. I looked at
the bank. It seemed to be going by very fast. There was much wood in the stream.
The water was very cold. We passed the brush of an island above the water. I held
onto the timber with both hands and let it take me along. The shore was out of sight
now.
31
You do not know how long you are in a river when the current moves swiftly. It
seems a long time and it may be very short. The water was cold and in flood and
many things passed that had been floated off the banks when the river rose. I was
lucky to have a heavy timber to hold on to, and I lay in the icy water with my chin on
the wood, holding as easily as I could with both hands. I was afraid of cramps and I
hoped we would move toward the shore. We went down the river in a long curve. It
was beginning to be light enough so I could see the bushes along the shore-line.
There was a brush island ahead and the current moved toward the shore. I
wondered if I should take off my boots and clothes and try to swim ashore, but
decided not to. I had never thought of anything but that I would reach the shore
some way, and I would be in a bad position if I landed barefoot. I had to get to
Mestre some way. I watched the shore come close, then swing away, then come
closer again. We were floating more slowly. The shore was very close now. I could
see twigs on the willow bush. The timber swung slowly so that the bank was behind
me and I knew we were in an eddy. We went slowly around. As I saw the bank
again, very close now, I tried holding with one arm and kicking and swimming the
timber toward the bank with the other, but I did not bring it any closer. I was afraid
we would move out of the eddy and, holding with one hand, I drew up my feet so
they were against the side of the timber and shoved hard toward the bank. I could
see the brush, but even with my momentum and swimming as hard as I could, the
current was taking me away. I thought then I would drown because of my boots, but I
thrashed and fought through the water, and when I looked up the bank was coming
toward me, and I kept thrashing and swimming in a heavy-footed panic until I
reached it. I hung to the willow branch and did not have strength to pull myself up but
I knew I would not drown now. It had never occurred to me on the timber that I might
drown. I felt hollow and sick in my stomach and chest from the effort, and I held to
the branches and waited. When the sick feeling was gone I pulled into the willow
bushes and rested again, my arms around some brush, holding tight with
“A Farewell to Arms” By Ernest Hemingway 98
my hands to the branches. Then I crawled out, pushed on through the willows and
onto the bank. It was halfdaylight and I saw no one. I lay flat on the bank and heard
the river and the rain. After a while I got up and started along the bank. I knew there
was no bridge across the river until Latisana. I thought I might be opposite San Vito.
I began to think out what I should do. Ahead there was a ditch running into the river.
I went toward it. So far I had seen no one and I sat down by some bushes along the
bank of the ditch and took off my shoes and emptied them of water. I took off my
coat, took my wallet with my papers and my money all wet in it out of the inside
pocket and then wrung the coat out. I took off my trousers and wrung them too, then
my shirt and under clothing. I slapped and rubbed myself and then dressed again. I
had lost my cap. Before I put on my coat I cut the cloth stars off my sleeves and put
them in the inside pocket with my money. My money was wet but was all right. I
counted it. There were three thousand and some lire. My clothes felt wet and
clammy and I slapped my arms to keep the circulation going. I had woven underwear
and I did not think I would catch cold if I kept moving. They had taken my pistol at
the road and I put the holster under my coat. I had no cape and it was cold in the
rain. I started up the bank of the canal. It was daylight and the country was wet, low
and dismal looking. The fields were bare and wet; a long way away I could see a
campanile rising out of the plain. I came up onto a road. Ahead I saw some troops
coming down the road. I limped along the side of the road and they passed me and
paid no attention to me. They were a machine-gun detachment going up toward the
river. I went on down the road. That day I crossed the Venetian plain. It is a low level
country and under the rain it is even flatter. Toward the sea there are salt marshes
and very few roads. The roads all go along the river mouths to the sea and to cross
the country you must go along the paths beside the canals. I was working across the
country from the north to the south and had crossed two railway lines and many
roads and finally I came out at the end of a path onto a railway line where it ran
beside a marsh. It was the main line from Venice to Trieste, with a high solid
embankment, a solid roadbed and double track. Down the tracks a way was a flagstation and I could see soldiers on guard. Up the line there was a bridge over a
stream that flowed into the marsh. I could see a guard too at the bridge. Crossing the
fields to the north I had seen a train pass on this railroad, visible a long way across
the flat plain, and I thought a train might come from Portogruaro. I watched the
guards and lay down on the embankment so that I could see both ways along the
track. The guard at the bridge walked a way up the line toward where flay, then
turned and went back toward the bridge. I lay, and was hungry, and waited for the
train. The one I had seen was so long that the engine moved it very slowly and I was
sure I could get aboard it. After I had almost given up hoping for one I saw a train
coming. The engine, coming straight on, grew larger slowly. I looked at the guard at
the bridge. He was walking on the near side of the bridge but on the other side of the
tracks. That would put him out of sight when the train passed. I watched the engine
come nearer. It was working hard. I could see there were many cars. I knew there
would be guards on the train, and I tried to see where they were, but, keeping out of
sight, I could not. The engine was almost to where I was lying. When it came
opposite, working and puffing even on the level, and I saw the engineer pass, I stood
up and stepped up close to the passing cars. If the guards were watching I was a
less suspicious object standing beside the track. Several closed freight-cars passed.
Then I saw a low open car of the sort they call gondolas coming, covered with
canvas. I stood until it had almost passed, then jumped and caught the rear hand-
rods and pulled up. I crawled down between the gondola and the shelter of the high
freight-car behind. I did not think any one had seen me. I was holding to the handrods and crouching low, my feet on the coupling. We were almost opposite the
bridge. I remembered the guard. As we passed him he looked at me. He was a boy
and his helmet was too big for him. I stared at him contemptuously and he looked
away. He thought I had something to do with the train. We were past. I saw him still
looking uncomfortable, watching the other cars pass and

“A Farewell to Arms” By Ernest Hemingway 99

I stooped to see how the canvas was fastened. It had grummets and was laced
down at the edge with cord. I took out my knife, cut the cord and put my arm under.
There were hard bulges under the canvas that tightened in the rain. I looked up and
ahead. There was a guard on the freight-car ahead but he was looking forward. I let
go of the hand-rails and ducked under the canvas. My forehead hit something that
gave me a violent bump and I felt blood on my face but I crawled on in and lay flat.
Then I turned around and fastened down the canvas. I was in under the canvas with
guns. They smelled cleanly of oil and grease. I lay and listened to the rain on the
canvas and the clicking of the car over the rails. There was a little light came through
and I lay and looked at the guns. They had their canvas jackets on. I thought they
must have been sent ahead from the third army. The bump on my forehead was
swollen and I stopped the bleeding by lying still and letting it coagulate, then picked
away the dried blood except over the cut. It was nothing. I had no handkerchief, but
feeling with my fingers I washed away where the dried blood had been, with
rainwater that dripped from the canvas, and wiped it clean with the sleeve of my
coat. I did not want to look conspicuous. I knew I would have to get out before they
got to Mestre because they would be taking care of these guns. They had no guns to
lose or forget about. I was terrifically hungry.
32
Lying on the floor of the flat-car with the guns beside me under the canvas I was wet,
cold and very hungry. Finally I rolled over and lay flat on my stomach with my head
on my arms. My knee was stiff, but it had been very satisfactory. Valentini had done
a fine job. I had done half the retreat on foot and swum part of the Tagliamento with
his knee. It was his knee all right. The other knee was mine. Doctors did things to
you and then it was not your body any more. The head was mine, and the inside of
the belly. It was very hungry in there. I could feel it turn over on itself. The head was
mine, but not to use, not to think with, only to remember and not too much
remember. I could remember Catherine but I knew I would get crazy if I thought
about her when I was not sure yet I would see her, so I would not think about her,
only about her a little, only about her with the car going slowly and clickingly, and
some light through the canvas and my lying with Catherine on the floor of the car.
Hard as the floor of the car to lie not thinking only feeling, having been away too
long, the clothes wet and the floor moving only a little each time and lonesome inside
and alone with wet clothing and hard floor for a wife. You did not love the floor of a
flat-car nor guns with canvas jackets and the smell of vaselined metal or a canvas
that rain leaked through, although it is very fine under a canvas and pleasant with
guns; but you loved some one else whom now you knew was not even to be
pretended there; you seeing now very clearly and coldly—not so coldly as clearly
and emptily. You saw emptily, lying on your stomach, having been present when one
army moved back and another came forward. You had lost your cars and your men
as a floorwalker loses the stock of his department in a fire. There was, however, no
insurance. You were out of it now. You had no more obligation. If they shot
floorwalkers after a fire in the department store because they spoke with an accent
they had always had, then certainly the floorwalkers would not be expected to return
when the store opened again for business. They might seek other employment; if
there was any other employment and the police did not get them. Anger was washed
away in the river along with any obligation. Although that ceased when the
carabiniere put his hands on my collar. I would like to have had the uniform off
although I did not care much about the outward forms. I had taken off the stars, but
that was for convenience. It was no point of honor. I was not against them. I was
through. I wished them all the luck. There were the good ones, and the brave ones,
and the calm ones and the sensible ones, and they deserved it. But it was not my
show any more and I wished this bloody train would get to Mestre and I would eat
and stop thinking. I would
“A Farewell to Arms” By Ernest Hemingway 100
have to stop. Piani would tell them they had shot me. They went through the pockets
and took the papers of the people they shot. They would not have my papers. They
might call me drowned. I wondered what they would hear in the States. Dead from
wounds and other causes. Good Christ I was hungry. I wondered what had become
of the priest at the mess. And Rinaldi. He was probably at Pordenone. If they had not
gone further back. Well, I would never see him now. I would never see any of them
now. That life was over. I did not think he had syphilis. It was not a serious disease
anyway if you took it in time, they said. But he would worry. I would worry too if I had
it. Any one would worry. I was not made to think. I was made to eat. My God, yes.
Eat and drink and sleep with Catherine. To-night maybe. No that was impossible.
But to-morrow night, and a good meal and sheets and never going away again
except together. Probably have to go damned quickly. She would go. I knew she
would go. When would we go? That was something to think about. It was getting
dark. I lay and thought where we would go. There were many places.
Book Four
33
I dropped off the train in Milan as it slowed to come into the station early in the
morning before it was light. I crossed the track and came out between some
buildings and down onto the street. A wine shop was open and I went in for some
coffee. It smelled of early morning, of swept dust, spoons in coffee-glasses and the
wet circles left by wine-glasses. The proprietor was behind the bar. Two soldiers sat
at a table. I stood at the bar and drank a glass of coffee and ate a piece of bread.
The coffee was gray with milk, and I skimmed the milk scum off the top with a piece
of bread. The proprietor looked at me. “You want a glass of grappa?” “No thanks.”
“On me,” he said and poured a small glass and pushed it toward me. “What’s
happening at the front?” “I would not know.” “They are drunk,” he said, moving his
hand toward the two soldiers. I could believe him. They looked drunk. “Tell me,” he
said, “what is happening at the front?” “I would not know about the front.” “I saw you
come down the wall. You came off the train.” “There is a big retreat.” “I read the
papers. What happens? Is it over?” “I don’t think so.” He filled the glass with grappa
from a short bottle. “If you are in trouble,” he said, “I can keep you.” “I am not in
trouble.” “If you are in trouble stay here with me.” “Where does one stay?” “In the
building. Many stay here. Any who are in trouble stay here.” “Are many in trouble?”
“It depends on the trouble. You are a South American?” “No.” “Speak Spanish?” “A
little.” He wiped off the bar. “It is hard now to leave the country but in no way
impossible.” “I have no wish to leave.”
“A Farewell to Arms” By Ernest Hemingway 101

“You can stay here as long as you want. You will see what sort of man I am.” “I have
to go this morning but I will remember the address to return.” He shook his head.
“You won’t come back if you talk like that. I thought you were in real trouble.” “I am in
no trouble. But I value the address of a friend.” I put a ten-lira note on the bar to pay
for the coffee. “Have a grappa with me,” I said. “It is not necessary.” “Have one.” He
poured the two glasses. “Remember,” he said. “Come here. Do not let other people
take you in. Here you are all right.” “I am sure.” “You are sure?” “Yes.” He was
serious. “Then let me tell you one thing. Do not go about with that coat.” “Why?” “On
the sleeves it shows very plainly where the stars have been cut away. The cloth is a
different color.” I did not say anything. “If you have no papers I can give you papers.”
“What papers?” “Leave-papers.” “I have no need for papers. I have papers.” “All
right,” he said. “But if you need papers I can get what you wish.” “How much are
such papers?” “It depends on what they are. The price is reasonable.” “I don’t need
any now.” He shrugged his shoulders. “I’m all right,” I said. When I went out he said,
“Don’t forget that I am your friend.” “No.” “I will see you again,” he said. “Good,” I
said. Outside I kept away from the station, where there were military police, and
picked up a cab at the edge of the little park. I gave the driver the address of the
hospital. At the hospital I went to the porter’s lodge. His wife embraced me. He
shook my hand. “You are back. You are safe.” “Yes.” “Have you had breakfast?”
“Yes.” “How are you, Tenente? How are you?” the wife asked. “Fine.” “Won’t you
have breakfast with us?” “No, thank you. Tell me is Miss Barkley here at the hospital
now?” “Miss Barkley?” “The English lady nurse.” “His girl,” the wife said. She patted
my arm and smiled. “No,” the porter said. “She is away.” My heart went down. “You
are sure? I mean the tall blonde English young lady.” “I am sure. She is gone to
Stresa.” “When did she go?” “She went two days ago with the other lady English.”
“Good,” I said. “I wish you to do something for me. Do not tell any one you have
seen me. It is very important.”

“A Farewell to Arms” By Ernest Hemingway 102

“I won’t tell any one,” the porter said. I gave him a ten-lira note. He pushed it away. “I
promise you I will tell no one,” he said. “I don’t want any money.” “What can we do
for you, Signor Tenente?” his wife asked. “Only that,” I said. “We are dumb,” the
porter said. “You will let me know anything I can do?” “Yes,” I said. “Good-by. I will
see you again.” They stood in the door, looking after me. I got into the cab and gave
the driver the address of Simmons, one of the men I knew who was studying singing.
Simmons lived a long way out in the town toward the Porta Magenta. He was still in
bed and sleepy when I went to see him. “You get up awfully early, Henry,” he said. “I
came in on the early train.” “What’s all this retreat? Were you at the front? Will you
have a cigarette? They’re in that box on the table.” It was a big room with a bed
beside the wall, a piano over on the far side and a dresser and table. I sat on a chair
by the bed. Simmons sat propped up by the pillows and smoked. “I’m in a jam, Sim,”
I said. “So am I,” he said. “I’m always in a jam. Won’t you smoke?” “No,” I said.
“What’s the procedure in going to Switzerland?” “For you? The Italians wouldn’t let
you out of the country.” “Yes. I know that. But the Swiss. What will they do?” “They
intern you.” “I know. But what’s the mechanics of it?” “Nothing. It’s very simple. You
can go anywhere. I think you just have to report or something. Why? Are you fleeing
the police?” “Nothing definite yet.” “Don’t tell me if you don’t want. But it would be
interesting to hear. Nothing happens here. I was a great flop at Piacenza.” “I’m
awfully sorry.” “Oh yes—I went very badly. I sung well too. I’m going to try it again at
the Lyrico here.” “I’d like to be there.” “You’re awfully polite. You aren’t in a bad
mess, are you?” “I don’t know.” “Don’t tell me if you don’t want. How do you happen
to be away from the bloody front?” “I think I’m through with it.” “Good boy. I always
knew you had sense. Can I help you any way?” “You’re awfully busy.” “Not a bit of it,
my dear Henry. Not a bit of it. I’d be happy to do anything.” “You’re about my size.
Would you go out and buy me an outfit of civilian clothes? I’ve clothes but they’re all
at Rome.” “You did live there, didn’t you? It’s a filthy place. How did you ever live
there?” “I wanted to be an architect.” “That’s no place for that. Don’t buy clothes. I’ll
give you all the clothes you want. I’ll fit you out so you’ll be a great success. Go in
that dressing room. There’s a closet. Take anything you want. My dear fellow, you
don’t want to buy clothes.” “I’d rather buy them, Sim.” “My dear fellow, it’s easier for
me to let you have them than go out and buy them. Have you got a passport? You
won’t get far without a passport.” “Yes. I’ve still got my passport.” “Then get dressed,
my dear fellow, and off to old Helvetia.” “It’s not that simple. I have to go up to Stresa
first.” “Ideal, my dear fellow. You just row a boat across. If I wasn’t trying to sing, I’d
go with you. I’ll go yet.”

“A Farewell to Arms” By Ernest Hemingway 103

“You could take up yodelling.” “My dear fellow, I’ll take up yodelling yet. I really can
sing though. That’s the strange part.” “I’ll bet you can sing.” He lay back in bed
smoking a cigarette. “Don’t bet too much. But I can sing though. It’s damned funny,
but I can. I like to sing. Listen.” He roared into “Africana,” his neck swelling, the veins
standing out. “I can sing,” he said. “Whether they like it or not.” I looked out of the
window. “I’ll go down and let my cab go.” “Come back up, my dear fellow, and we’ll
have breakfast.” He stepped out of bed, stood straight, took a deep breath and
commenced doing bending exercises. I went downstairs and paid off the cab.
34
In civilian clothes I felt a masquerader. I had been in uniform a long time and I
missed the feeling of being held by your clothes. The trousers felt very floppy. I had
bought a ticket at Milan for Stresa. I had also bought a new hat. I could not wear
Sim’s hat but his clothes were fine. They smelled of tobacco and as I sat in the
compartment and looked out the window the new hat felt very new and the clothes
very old. I myself felt as sad as the wet Lombard country that was outside through
the window. There were some aviators in the compartment who did not think much
of me. They avoided looking at me and were very scornful of a civilian my age. I did
not feel insulted. In the old days I would have insulted them and picked a fight. They
got off at Gallarate and I was glad to be alone. I had the paper but I did not read it
because I did not want to read about the war. I was going to forget the war. I had
made a separate peace. I felt damned lonely and was glad when the train got to
Stresa. At the station I had expected to see the porters from the hotels but there was
no one. The season had been over a long time and no one met the train. I got down
from the train with my bag, it was Sim’s bag, and very light to carry, being empty
except for two shirts, and stood under the roof of the station in the rain while the train
went on. I found a man in the station and asked him if he knew what hotels were
open. The Grand-Hotel & des Isles Borromées was open and several small hotels
that stayed open all the year. I started in the rain for the Isles Borromées carrying my
bag. I saw a carriage coming down the street and signalled to the driver. It was
better to arrive in a carriage. We drove up to the carriage entrance of the big hotel
and the concierge came out with an umbrella and was very polite. I took a good
room. It was very big and light and looked out on the lake. The clouds were down
over the lake but it would be beautiful with the sunlight. I was expecting my wife, I
said. There was a big double bed, a letto matrimoniale with a satin coverlet. The
hotel was very luxurious. I went down the long halls, down the wide stairs, through
the rooms to the bar. I knew the barman and sat on a high stool and ate salted
almonds and potato chips. The martini felt cool and clean. “What are you doing here
in borghese?” the barman asked after he had mixed a second martini. “I am on
leave. Convalescing-leave.” “There is no one here. I don’t know why they keep the
hotel open.” “Have you been fishing?” “I’ve caught some beautiful pieces. Trolling
this time of year you catch some beautiful pieces.” “Did you ever get the tobacco I
sent?” “Yes. Didn’t you get my card?” I laughed. I had not been able to get the
tobacco. It was American pipe-tobacco that he wanted, but my relatives had stopped
sending it or it was being held up. Anyway it never came.
“A Farewell to Arms” By Ernest Hemingway 104
“I’ll get some somewhere,” I said. “Tell me have you seen two English girls in the
town? They came here day before yesterday.” “They are not at the hotel.” “They are
nurses.” “I have seen two nurses. Wait a minute, I will find out where they are.” “One
of them is my wife,” I said. “I have come here to meet her.” “The other is my wife.” “I
am not joking.” “Pardon my stupid joke,” he said. “I did not understand.” He went
away and was gone quite a little while. I ate olives, salted almonds and potato chips
and looked at myself in civilian clothes in the mirror behind the bar. The bartender
came back. “They are at the little hotel near the station,” he said. “How about some
sandwiches?” “I’ll ring for some. You understand there is nothing here, now there are
no people.” “Isn’t there really any one at all?” “Yes. There are a few people.” The
sandwiches came and I ate three and drank a couple more martinis. I had never
tasted anything so cool and clean. They made me feel civilized. I had had too much
red wine, bread, cheese, bad coffee and grappa. I sat on the high stool before the
pleasant mahogany, the brass and the mirrors and did not think at all. The barman
asked me some question. “Don’t talk about the war,” I said. The war was a long way
away. Maybe there wasn’t any war. There was no war here. Then I realized it was
over for me. But I did not have the feeling that it was really over. I had the feeling of
a boy who thinks of what is happening at a certain hour at the schoolhouse from
which he has played truant. Catherine and Helen Ferguson were at supper when I
came to their hotel. Standing in the hallway I saw them at table. Catherine’s face
was away from me and I saw the line of her hair and her cheek and her lovely neck
and shoulders. Ferguson was talking. She stopped when I came in. “My God,” she
said. “Hello,” I said. “Why it’s you!” Catherine said. Her face lighted up. She looked
too happy to believe it. I kissed her. Catherine blushed and I sat down at the table.
“You’re a fine mess,” Ferguson said. “What are you doing here? Have you eaten?”
“No.” The girl who was serving the meal came in and I told her to bring a plate for
me. Catherine looked at me all the time, her eyes happy. “What are you doing in
mufti?” Ferguson asked. “I’m in the Cabinet.” “You’re in some mess.” “Cheer up,
Fergy. Cheer up just a little.” “I’m not cheered by seeing you. I know the mess you’ve
gotten this girl into. You’re no cheerful sight to me.” Catherine smiled at me and
touched me with her foot under the table. “No one got me in a mess, Fergy. I get in
my own messes.” “I can’t stand him,” Ferguson said. “He’s done nothing but ruin you
with his sneaking Italian tricks. Americans are worse than Italians.” “The Scotch are
such a moral people,” Catherine said. “I don’t mean that. I mean his Italian
sneakiness.” “Am I sneaky, Fergy?” “You are. You’re worse than sneaky. You’re like
a snake. A snake with an Italian uniform: with a cape around your neck.” “I haven’t
got an Italian uniform now.” “That’s just another example of your sneakiness. You
had a love affair all summer and got this girl with child and now I suppose you’ll
sneak off.” I smiled at Catherine and she smiled at me.

“A Farewell to Arms” By Ernest Hemingway 105

“We’ll both sneak off,” she said. “You’re two of the same thing,” Ferguson said. “I’m
ashamed of you, Catherine Barkley. You have no shame and no honor and you’re as
sneaky as he is.” “Don’t, Fergy,” Catherine said and patted her hand. “Don’t
denounce me. You know we like each other.” “Take your hand away,” Ferguson
said. Her face was red. “If you had any shame it would be different. But you’re God
knows how many months gone with child and you think it’s a joke and are all smiles
because your seducer’s come back. You’ve no shame and no feelings.” She began
to cry. Catherine went over and put her arm around her. As she stood comforting
Ferguson, I could see no change in her figure. “I don’t care,” Ferguson sobbed. “I
think it’s dreadful.” “There, there, Fergy,” Catherine comforted her. “I’ll be ashamed.
Don’t cry, Fergy. Don’t cry, old Fergy.” “I’m not crying,” Ferguson sobbed. “I’m not
crying. Except for the awful thing you’ve gotten into.” She looked at me. “I hate you,”
she said. “She can’t make me not hate you. You dirty sneaking American Italian.”
Her eyes and nose were red with crying. Catherine smiled at me. “Don’t you smile at
him with your arm around me.” “You’re unreasonable, Fergy.” “I know it,” Ferguson
sobbed. “You mustn’t mind me, either of you. I’m so upset. I’m not reasonable. I
know it. I want you both to be happy.” “We’re happy,” Catherine said. “You’re a
sweet Fergy.” Ferguson cried again. “I don’t want you happy the way you are. Why
don’t you get married? You haven’t got another wife have you?” “No,” I said.
Catherine laughed. “It’s nothing to laugh about,” Ferguson said. “Plenty of them have
other wives.” “We’ll be married, Fergy,” Catherine said, “if it will please you.” “Not to
please me. You should want to be married.” “We’ve been very busy.” “Yes. I know.
Busy making babies.” I thought she was going to cry again but she went into
bitterness instead. “I suppose you’ll go off with him now to-night?” “Yes,” said
Catherine. “If he wants me.” “What about me?” “Are you afraid to stay here alone?”
“Yes, I am.” “Then I’ll stay with you.” “No, go on with him. Go with him right away. I’m
sick of seeing both of you.” “We’d better finish dinner.” “No. Go right away.” “Fergy,
be reasonable.” “I say get out right away. Go away both of you.” “Let’s go then,” I
said. I was sick of Fergy. “You do want to go. You see you want to leave me even to
eat dinner alone. I’ve always wanted to go to the Italian lakes and this is how it is.
Oh, Oh,” she sobbed, then looked at Catherine and choked. “We’ll stay till after
dinner,” Catherine said. “And I’ll not leave you alone if you want me to stay. I won’t
leave you alone, Fergy.” “No. No. I want you to go. I want you to go.” She wiped her
eyes. “I’m so unreasonable. Please don’t mind me.” The girl who served the meal
had been upset by all the crying. Now as she brought in the next course she seemed
relieved that things were better. That night at the hotel, in our room with the long
empty hall outside and our shoes outside the door, a thick carpet on the floor of the
room, outside the windows the rain falling and in the room light and pleasant and
cheerful, then the light out and it exciting with smooth sheets and the bed
comfortable, feeling that we had come home, feeling no

“A Farewell to Arms” By Ernest Hemingway 106

longer alone, waking in the night to find the other one there, and not gone away; all
other things were unreal. We slept when we were tired and if we woke the other one
woke too so one was not alone. Often a man wishes to be alone and a girl wishes to
be alone too and if they love each other they are jealous of that in each other, but I
can truly say we never felt that. We could feel alone when we were together, alone
against the others. It has only happened to me like that once. I have been alone
while I was with many girls and that is the way that you can be most lonely. But we
were never lonely and never afraid when we were together. I know that the night is
not the same as the day: that all things are different, that the things of the night
cannot be explained in the day, because they do not then exist, and the night can be
a dreadful time for lonely people once their loneliness has started. But with
Catherine there was almost no difference in the night except that it was an even
better time. If people bring so much courage to this world the world has to kill them
to break them, so of course it kills them. The world breaks every one and afterward
many are strong at the broken places. But those that will not break it kills. It kills the
very good and the very gentle and the very brave impartially. If you are none of
these you can be sure it will kill you too but there will be no special hurry. I
remember waking in the morning. Catherine was asleep and the sunlight was
coming in through the window. The rain had stopped and I stepped out of bed and
across the floor to the window. Down below were the gardens, bare now but
beautifully regular, the gravel paths, the trees, the stone wall by the lake and the lake
in the sunlight with the mountains beyond. I stood at the window looking out and
when I turned away I saw Catherine was awake and watching me. “How are you,
darling?” she said. “Isn’t it a lovely day?” “How do you feel?” “I feel very well. We had
a lovely night.” “Do you want breakfast?” She wanted breakfast. So did I and we had
it in bed, the November sunlight coming in the window, and the breakfast tray across
my lap. “Don’t you want the paper? You always wanted the paper in the hospital?”
“No,” I said. “I don’t want the paper now.” “Was it so bad you don’t want even to read
about it?” “I don’t want to read about it.” “I wish I had been with you so I would know
about it too.” “I’ll tell you about it if I ever get it straight in my head.” “But won’t they
arrest you if they catch you out of uniform?” “They’ll probably shoot me.” “Then we’ll
not stay here. We’ll get out of the country.” “I’d thought something of that.” “We’ll get
out. Darling, you shouldn’t take silly chances. Tell me how did you come from Mestre
to Milan?” “I came on the train. I was in uniform then.” “Weren’t you in danger then?”
“Not much. I had an old order of movement. I fixed the dates on it in Mestre.”
“Darling, you’re liable to be arrested here any time. I won’t have it. It’s silly to do
something like that. Where would we be if they took you off?” “Let’s not think about
it. I’m tired of thinking about it.” “What would you do if they came to arrest you?”
“Shoot them.” “You see how silly you are, I won’t let you go out of the hotel until we
leave here.” “Where are we going to go?” “Please don’t be that way, darling. We’ll go
wherever you say. But please find some place to go right away.” “Switzerland is
down the lake, we can go there.” “That will be lovely.”

“A Farewell to Arms” By Ernest Hemingway 107

It was clouding over outside and the lake was darkening. “I wish we did not always
have to live like criminals,” I said. “Darling, don’t be that way. You haven’t lived like a
criminal very long. And we never live like criminals. We’re going to have a fine time.”
“I feel like a criminal. I’ve deserted from the army.” “Darling, please be sensible. It’s
not deserting from the army. It’s only the Italian army.” I laughed. “You’re a fine girl.
Let’s get back into bed. I feel fine in bed.” A little while later Catherine said, “You
don’t feel like a criminal do you?” “No,” I said. “Not when I’m with you.” “You’re such
a silly boy,” she said. “But I’ll look after you. Isn’t it splendid, darling, that I don’t have
any morning-sickness?” “It’s grand.” “You don’t appreciate what a fine wife you have.
But I don’t care. I’ll get you some place where they can’t arrest you and then we’ll
have a lovely time.” “Let’s go there right away.” “We will, darling. I’ll go any place any
time you wish.” “Let’s not think about anything.” “All right.”
35
Catherine went along the lake to the little hotel to see Ferguson and I sat in the bar
and read the papers. There were comfortable leather chairs in the bar and I sat in
one of them and read until the barman came in. The army had not stood at the
Tagliamento. They were falling back to the Piave. I remembered the Piave. The
railroad crossed it near San Dona going up to the front. It was deep and slow there
and quite narrow. Down below there were mosquito marshes and canals. There
were some lovely villas. Once, before the war, going up to Cortina D’Ampezzo I had
gone along it for several hours in the hills. Up there it looked like a trout stream,
flowing swiftly with shallow stretches and pools under the shadow of the rocks. The
road turned off from it at Cadore. I wondered how the army that was up there would
come down. The barman came in. “Count Greffi was asking for you,” he said.
“Who?” “Count Greffi. You remember the old man who was here when you were
here before.” “Is he here?” “Yes, he’s here with his niece. I told him you were here.
He wants you to play billiards.” “Where is he?” “He’s taking a walk.” “How is he?”
“He’s younger than ever. He drank three champagne cocktails last night before
dinner.” “How’s his billiard game?” “Good. He beat me. When I told him you were
here he was very pleased. There’s nobody here for him to play with.” Count Greffi
was ninety-four years old. He had been a contemporary of Metternich and was an
old man with white hair and mustache and beautiful manners. He had been in the
diplomatic service of both Austria and Italy and his birthday parties were the great
social event of Milan. He was living to be one hundred years old and played a
smoothly fluent game of billiards that contrasted with his own ninety-four-year-old
brittleness. I had met him when I had been at Stresa once before out of season and
while we played billiards we drank champagne. I thought it was a splendid custom
and he gave me fifteen points in a hundred and beat me.
“A Farewell to Arms” By Ernest Hemingway 108
“Why didn’t you tell me he was here?” “I forgot it.” “Who else is here?” “No one you
know. There are only six people altogether.” “What are you doing now?” “Nothing.”
“Come on out fishing.” “I could come for an hour.” “Come on. Bring the trolling line.”
The barman put on a coat and we went out. We went down and got a boat and I
rowed while the barman sat in the stern and let out the line with a spinner and a
heavy sinker on the end to troll for lake trout. We rowed along the shore, the barman
holding the line in his hand and giving it occasional jerks forward. Stresa looked very
deserted from the lake. There were the long rows of bare trees, the big hotels and
the closed villas. I rowed across to Isola Bella and went close to the walls, where the
water deepened sharply, and you saw the rock wall slanting down in the clear water,
and then up and along to the fisherman’s island. The sun was under a cloud and the
water was dark and smooth and very cold. We did not have a strike though we saw
some circles on the water from rising fish. I rowed up opposite the fisherman’s island
where there were boats drawn up and men were mending nets. “Should we get a
drink?” “All right.” I brought the boat up to the stone pier and the barman pulled in the
line, coiling it on the bottom of the boat and hooking the spinner on the edge of the
gunwale. I stepped out and tied the boat. We went into a little café, sat at a bare
wooden table and ordered vermouth. “Are you tired from rowing?” “I’ll row back,” he
said. “I like to row.” “Maybe if you hold the line it will change the luck.” “All right.” “Tell
me how goes the war.” “Rotten.” “I don’t have to go. I’m too old, like Count Greffi.”
“Maybe you’ll have to go yet.” “Next year they’ll call my class. But I won’t go.” “What
will you do?” “Get out of the country. I wouldn’t go to war. I was at the war once in
Abyssinia. Nix. Why do you go?” “I don’t know. I was a fool.” “Have another
vermouth?” “All right.” The barman rowed back. We trolled up the lake beyond
Stresa and then down not far from shore. I held the taut line and felt the faint pulsing
of the spinner revolving while I looked at the dark November water of the lake and
the deserted shore. The barman rowed with long strokes and on the forward thrust of
the boat the line throbbed. Once I had a strike: the line hardened suddenly and
jerked back. I pulled and felt the live weight of the trout and then the line throbbed
again. I had missed him. “Did he feel big?” “Pretty big.” “Once when I was out trolling
alone I had the line in my teeth and one struck and nearly took my mouth out.” “The
best way is to have it over your leg,” I said. “Then you feel it and don’t lose your
teeth.”

“A Farewell to Arms” By Ernest Hemingway 109

I put my hand in the water. It was very cold. We were almost opposite the hotel now.
“I have to go in,” the barman said, “to be there for eleven o’clock. L’heure du
cocktail.” “All right.” I pulled in the line and wrapped it on a stick notched at each end.
The barman put the boat in a little slip in the stone wall and locked it with a chain and
padlock. “Any time you want it,” he said, “I’ll give you the key.” “Thanks.” We went up
to the hotel and into the bar. I did not want another drink so early in the morning so I
went up to our room. The maid had just finished doing the room and Catherine was
not back yet. I lay down on the bed and tried to keep from thinking. When Catherine
came back it was all right again. Ferguson was downstairs, she said. She was
coming to lunch. “I knew you wouldn’t mind,” Catherine said. “No,” I said. “What’s the
matter, darling?” “I don’t know.” “I know. You haven’t anything to do. All you have is
me and I go away.” “That’s true.” “I’m sorry, darling. I know it must be a dreadful
feeling to have nothing at all suddenly.” “My life used to be full of everything,” I said.
“Now if you aren’t with me I haven’t a thing in the world.” “But I’ll be with you. I was
only gone for two hours. Isn’t there anything you can do?” “I went fishing with the
barman.” “Wasn’t it fun?” “Yes.” “Don’t think about me when I’m not here.” “That’s
the way I worked it at the front. But there was something to do then.” “Othello with
his occupation gone,” she teased. “Othello was a nigger,” I said. “Besides, I’m not
jealous. I’m just so in love with you that there isn’t anything else.” “Will you be a good
boy and be nice to Ferguson?” “I’m always nice to Ferguson unless she curses me.”
“Be nice to her. Think how much we have and she hasn’t anything.” “I don’t think she
wants what we have.” “You don’t know much, darling, for such a wise boy.” “I’ll be
nice to her.” “I know you will. You’re so sweet.” “She won’t stay afterward, will she?”
“No. I’ll get rid of her.” “And then we’ll come up here.” “Of course. What do you think I
want to do?” We went downstairs to have lunch with Ferguson. She was very
impressed by the hotel and the splendor of the dining-room. We had a good lunch
with a couple of bottles of white capri. Count Greffi came into the dining-room and
bowed to us. His niece, who looked a little like my grandmother, was with him. I told
Catherine and Ferguson about him and Ferguson was very impressed. The hotel
was very big and grand and empty but the food was good, the wine was very
pleasant and finally the wine made us all feel very well. Catherine had no need to
feel any better. She was very happy. Ferguson became quite cheerful. I felt very well
myself. After lunch Ferguson went back to her hotel. She was going to lie down for a
while after lunch she said. Along late in the afternoon some one knocked on our
door. “Who is it?” “The Count Greffi wishes to know if you will play billiards with him.”
I looked at my watch; I had taken it off and it was under the pillow. “Do you have to
go, darling?” Catherine whispered.

“A Farewell to Arms” By Ernest Hemingway 110

“I think I’d better.” The watch was a quarter-past four o’clock. Out loud I said, “Tell
the Count Greffi I will be in the billiard-room at five o’clock.” At a quarter to five I
kissed Catherine good-by and went into the bathroom to dress. Knotting my tie and
looking in the glass I looked strange to myself in the civilian clothes. I must
remember to buy some more shirts and socks. “Will you be away a long time?”
Catherine asked. She looked lovely in the bed. “Would you hand me the brush?” I
watched her brushing her hair, holding her head so the weight of her hair all came
on one side. It was dark outside and the light over the head of the bed shone on her
hair and on her neck and shoulders. I went over and kissed her and held her hand
with the brush and her head sunk back on the pillow. I kissed her neck and
shoulders. I felt faint with loving her so much. “I don’t want to go away.” “I don’t want
you to go away.” “I won’t go then.” “Yes. Go. It’s only for a little while and then you’ll
come back.” “We’ll have dinner up here.” “Hurry and come back.” I found the Count
Greffi in the billiard-room. He was practising strokes, looking very fragile under the
light that came down above the billiard table. On a card table a little way beyond the
light was a silver icing-bucket with the necks and corks of two champagne bottles
showing above the ice. The Count Greffi straightened up when I came toward the
table and walked toward me. He put out his hand, “It is such a great pleasure that
you are here. You were very kind to come to play with me.” “It was very nice of you
to ask me.” “Are you quite well? They told me you were wounded on the Isonzo. I
hope you are well again.” “I’m very well. Have you been well?” “Oh, I am always well.
But I am getting old. I detect signs of age now.” “I can’t believe it.” “Yes. Do you want
to know one? It is easier for me to talk Italian. I discipline myself but I find when I am
tired that it is so much easier to talk Italian. So I know I must be getting old.” “We
could talk Italian. I am a little tired, too.” “Oh, but when you are tired it will be easier
for you to talk English.” “American.” “Yes. American. You will please talk American. It
is a delightful language.” “I hardly ever see Americans.” “You must miss them. One
misses one’s countrymen and especially one’s countrywomen. I know that
experience. Should we play or are you too tired?” “I’m not really tired. I said that for a
joke. What handicap will you give me?” “Have you been playing very much?” “None
at all.” “You play very well. Ten points in a hundred?” “You flatter me.” “Fifteen?”
“That would be fine but you will beat me.” “Should we play for a stake? You always
wished to play for a stake.” “I think we’d better.” “All right. I will give you eighteen
points and we will play for a franc a point.” He played a lovely game of billiards and
with the handicap I was only four ahead at fifty. Count Greffi pushed a button on the
wall to ring for the barman. “Open one bottle please,” he said. Then to me, “We will
take a little stimulant.” The wine was icy cold and very dry and good. “Should we talk
Italian? Would you mind very much? It is my weakness now.”

“A Farewell to Arms” By Ernest Hemingway 111

We went on playing, sipping the wine between shots, speaking in Italian, but talking
little, concentrated on the game. Count Greffi made his one hundredth point and with
the handicap I was only at ninety-four. He smiled and patted me on the shoulder.
“Now we will drink the other bottle and you will tell me about the war.” He waited for
me to sit down. “About anything else,” I said. “You don’t want to talk about it? Good.
What have you been reading?” “Nothing,” I said. “I’m afraid I am very dull.” “No. But
you should read.” “What is there written in war-time?” “There is ‘Le Feu’ by a
Frenchman, Barbusse. There is ‘Mr. Britling Sees Through It.” “No, he doesn’t.”
“What?” “He doesn’t see through it. Those books were at the hospital.” “Then you
have been reading?” “Yes, but nothing any good.” “I thought ‘Mr. Britling’ a very good
study of the English middle-class soul.” “I don’t know about the soul.” “Poor boy. We
none of us know about the soul. Are you Croyant?” “At night.” Count Greffi smiled
and turned the glass with his fingers. “I had expected to become more devout as I
grow older but somehow I haven’t,” he said. “It is a great pity.” “Would you like to live
after death?” I asked and instantly felt a fool to mention death. But he did not mind
the word. “It would depend on the life. This life is very pleasant. I would like to live
forever,” he smiled. “I very nearly have.” We were sitting in the deep leather chairs,
the champagne in the ice-bucket and our glasses on the table between us. “If you
ever live to be as old as I am you will find many things strange.” “You never seem
old.” “It is the body that is old. Sometimes I am afraid I will break off a finger as one
breaks a stick of chalk. And the spirit is no older and not much wiser.” “You are
wise.” “No, that is the great fallacy; the wisdom of old men. They do not grow wise.
They grow careful.” “Perhaps that is wisdom.” “It is a very unattractive wisdom. What
do you value most?” “Some one I love.” “With me it is the same. That is not wisdom.
Do you value life?” “Yes.” “So do I. Because it is all I have. And to give birthday
parties,” he laughed. “You are probably wiser than I am. You do not give birthday
parties.” We both drank the wine. “What do you think of the war really?” I asked. “I
think it is stupid.” “Who will win it?” “Italy.” “Why?” “They are a younger nation.” “Do
younger nations always win wars?” “They are apt to for a time.” “Then what
happens?” “They become older nations.” “You said you were not wise.” “Dear boy,
that is not wisdom. That is cynicism.”

“A Farewell to Arms” By Ernest Hemingway 112

“It sounds very wise to me.” “It’s not particularly. I could quote you the examples on
the other side. But it is not bad. Have we finished the champagne?” “Almost.”
“Should we drink some more? Then I must dress.” “Perhaps we’d better not now.”
“You are sure you don’t want more?” “Yes.” He stood up. “I hope you will be very
fortunate and very happy and very, very healthy.” “Thank you. And I hope you will
live forever.” “Thank you. I have. And if you ever become devout pray for me if I am
dead. I am asking several of my friends to do that. I had expected to become devout
myself but it has not come.” I thought he smiled sadly but I could not tell. He was so
old and his face was very wrinkled, so that a smile used so many lines that all
gradations were lost. “I might become very devout,” I said. “Anyway, I will pray for
you.” “I had always expected to become devout. All my family died very devout. But
somehow it does not come.” “It’s too early.” “Maybe it is too late. Perhaps I have
outlived my religious feeling.” “My own comes only at night.” “Then too you are in
love. Do not forget that is a religious feeling.” “You believe so?” “Of course.” He took
a step toward the table. “You were very kind to play.” “It was a great pleasure.” “We
will walk up stairs together.”
36
That night there was a storm and I woke to hear the rain lashing the window-panes.
It was coming in the open window. Some one had knocked on the door. I went to the
door very softly, not to disturb Catherine, and opened it. The barman stood there. He
wore his overcoat and carried his wet hat. “Can I speak to you, Tenente?” “What’s
the matter?” “It’s a very serious matter.” I looked around. The room was dark. I saw
the water on the floor from the window. “Come in,” I said. I took him by the arm into
the bathroom; locked the door and put on the light. I sat down on the edge of the
bathtub. “What’s the matter, Emilio? Are you in trouble?” “No. You are, Tenente.”
“Yes?” “They are going to arrest you in the morning.” “Yes?” “I came to tell you. I
was out in the town and I heard them talking in a café.” “I see.” He stood there, his
coat wet, holding his wet hat and said nothing. “Why are they going to arrest me?”
“For something about the war.” “Do you know what?” “No. But I know that they know
you were here before as an officer and now you are here out of uniform. After this
retreat they arrest everybody.” I thought a minute. “What time do they come to arrest
me?” “In the morning. I don’t know the time.” “What do you say to do?”
“A Farewell to Arms” By Ernest Hemingway 113
He put his hat in the washbowl. It was very wet and had been dripping on the floor.
“If you have nothing to fear an arrest is nothing. But it is always bad to be arrested—
especially now.” “I don’t want to be arrested.” “Then go to Switzerland.” “How?” “In
my boat.” “There is a storm,” I said. “The storm is over. It is rough but you will be all
right.” “When should we go?” “Right away. They might come to arrest you early in
the morning.” “What about our bags?” “Get them packed. Get your lady dressed. I
will take care of them.” “Where will you be?” “I will wait here. I don’t want any one to
see me outside in the hall.” I opened the door, closed it, and went into the bedroom.
Catherine was awake. “What is it, darling?” “It’s all right, Cat,” I said. “Would you like
to get dressed right away and go in a boat to Switzerland?” “Would you?” “No,” I
said. “I’d like to go back to bed.” “What is it about?” “The barman says they are going
to arrest me in the morning.” “Is the barman crazy?” “No.” “Then please hurry,
darling, and get dressed so we can start.” She sat up on the side of the bed. She
was still sleepy. “Is that the barman in the bathroom?” “Yes.” “Then I won’t wash.
Please look the other way, darling, and I’ll be dressed in just a minute.” I saw her
white back as she took off her night-gown and then I looked away because she
wanted me to. She was beginning to be a little big with the child and she did not
want me to see her. I dressed hearing the rain on the windows. I did not have much
to put in my bag. “There’s plenty of room in my bag, Cat, if you need any.” “I’m
almost packed,” she said. “Darling, I’m awfully stupid, but why is the barman in the
bathroom?” “Sh—he’s waiting to take our bags down.” “He’s awfully nice.” “He’s an
old friend,” I said. “I nearly sent him some pipetobacco once.” I looked out the open
window at the dark night. I could not see the lake, only the dark and the rain but the
wind was quieter. “I’m ready, darling,” Catherine said. “All right.” I went to the
bathroom door. “Here are the bags, Emilio,” I said. The barman took the two bags.
“You’re very good to help us,” Catherine said. “That’s nothing, lady,” the barman
said. “I’m glad to help you just so I don’t get in trouble myself. Listen,” he said to me.
“I’ll take these out the servants’ stairs and to the boat. You just go out as though you
were going for a walk.” “It’s a lovely night for a walk,” Catherine said. “It’s a bad night
all right.” “I’m glad I’ve an umbrella,” Catherine said. We walked down the hall and
down the wide thickly carpeted stairs. At the foot of the stairs by the door the porter
sat behind his desk. He looked surprised at seeing us.

“A Farewell to Arms” By Ernest Hemingway 114

“You’re not going out, sir?” he said. “Yes,” I said. “We’re going to see the storm
along the lake.” “Haven’t you got an umbrella, sir?” “No,” I said. “This coat sheds
water.” He looked at it doubtfully. “I’ll get you an umbrella, sir,” he said. He went
away and came back with a big umbrella. “It is a little big, sir,” he said. I gave him a
ten-lira note. “Oh you are too good, sir. Thank you very much,” he said. He held the
door open and we went out into the rain. He smiled at Catherine and she smiled at
him. “Don’t stay out in the storm,” he said. “You will get wet, sir and lady.” He was
only the second porter, and his English was still literally translated. “We’ll be back,” I
said. We walked down the path under the giant umbrella and out through the dark
wet gardens to the road and across the road to the trellised pathway along the lake.
The wind was blowing offshore now. It was a cold, wet November wind and I knew it
was snowing in the mountains. We came along past the chained boats in the slips
along the quay to where the barman’s boat should be. The water was dark against
the stone. The barman stepped out from beside the row of trees. “The bags are in
the boat,” he said. “I want to pay you for the boat,” I said. “How much money have
you?” “Not so much.” “You send me the money later. That will be all right.” “How
much?” “What you want.” “Tell me how much.” “If you get through send me five
hundred francs. You won’t mind that if you get through.” “All right.” “Here are
sandwiches.” He handed me a package. “Everything there was in the bar. It’s all
here. This is a bottle of brandy and a bottle of wine.” I put them in my bag. “Let me
pay you for those.” “All right, give me fifty lire.” I gave itto him. “The brandy is good,”
he said. “You don’t need to be afraid to give itto your lady. She better get in the
boat.” He held the boat, it rising and falling against the stone wall and I helped
Catherine in. She sat in the stern and pulled her cape around her. “You know where
to go?” “Up the lake.” “You know how far?” “Past Luino.” “Past Luino, Cannero,
Cannobio, Tranzano. You aren’t in Switzerland until you come to Brissago. You have
to pass Monte Tamara.” “What time is it?” Catherine asked. “It’s only eleven o’clock,”
I said. “If you row all the time you ought to be there by seven o’clock in the morning.”
“Is it that far?” “It’s thirty-five kilometres.” “How should we go? In this rain we need a
compass.” “No. Row to Isola Bella. Then on the other side of Isola Madre go with the
wind. The wind will take you to Pallanza. You will see the lights. Then go up the
shore.” “Maybe the wind will change.” “No,” he said. “This wind will blow like this for
three days. It comes straight down from the Mattarone. There is a can to bail with.”
“Let me pay you something for the boat now.” “No, I’d rather take a chance. If you
get through you pay me all you can.” “All right.”

“A Farewell to Arms” By Ernest Hemingway 115

“I don’t think you’ll get drowned.” “That’s good.” “Go with the wind up the lake.” “All
right.” I stepped in the boat. “Did you leave the money for the hotel?” “Yes. In an
envelope in the room.” “All right. Good luck, Tenente.” “Good luck. We thank you
many times.” “You won’t thank me if you get drowned.” “What does he say?”
Catherine asked. “He says good luck.” “Good luck,” Catherine said. “Thank you very
much.” “Are you ready?” “Yes.” He bent down and shoved us off. I dug at the water
with the oars, then waved one hand. The barman waved back deprecatingly. I saw
the lights of the hotel and rowed out, rowing straight out until they were out of sight.
There was quite a sea running but we were going with the wind.
37
I rowed in the dark keeping the wind in my face. The rain had stopped and only
came occasionally in gusts. It was very dark, and the wind was cold. I could see
Catherine in the stern but I could not see the water where the blades of the oars
dipped. The oars were long and there were no leathers to keep them from slipping
out. I pulled, raised, leaned forward, found the water, dipped and pulled, rowing as
easily as I could. I did not feather the oars because the wind was with us. I knew my
hands would blister and I wanted to delay it as long as I could. The boat was light
and rowed easily. I pulled it along in the dark water. I could not see, and hoped we
would soon come opposite Pallanza. We never saw Pallanza. The wind was blowing
up the lake and we passed the point that hides Pallanza in the dark and never saw
the lights. When we finally saw some lights much further up the lake and close to the
shore it was Intra. But for a long time we did not see any lights, nor did we see the
shore but rowed steadily in the dark riding with the waves. Sometimes I missed the
water with the oars in the dark as a wave lifted the boat. It was quite rough; but I kept
on rowing, until suddenly we were close ashore against a point of rock that rose
beside us; the waves striking against it, rushing high up, then falling back. I pulled
hard on the right oar and backed water with the other and we went out into the lake
again; the point was out of sight and we were going on up the lake. “We’re across
the lake,” I said to Catherine. “Weren’t we going to see Pallanza?” “We’ve missed it.”
“How are you, darling?” “I’m fine.” “I could take the oars awhile.” “No, I’m fine.” “Poor
Ferguson,” Catherine said. “In the morning she’ll come to the hotel and find we’re
gone.” “I’m not worrying so much about that,” I said, “as about getting into the Swiss
part of the lake before it’s daylight and the custom guards see us.” “Is it a long way?”
“It’s some thirty kilometres from here.”
“A Farewell to Arms” By Ernest Hemingway 116

I rowed all night. Finally my hands were so sore I could hardly close them over the
oars. We were nearly smashed up on the shore several times. I kept fairly close to
the shore because I was afraid of getting lost on the lake and losing time.
Sometimes we were so close we could see a row of trees and the road along the
shore with the mountains behind. The rain stopped and the wind drove the clouds so
that the moon shone through and looking back I could see the long dark point of
Castagnola and the lake with white-caps and beyond, the moon on the high snow
mountains. Then the clouds came over the moon again and the mountains and the
lake were gone, but it was much lighter than it had been before and we could see
the shore. I could see it too clearly and pulled out where they would not see the boat
if there were custom guards along the Pallanza road. When the moon came out
again we could see white villas on the shore on the slopes of the mountain and
thewhite road where it showed through the trees. All the time I was rowing. The lake
widened and across it on the shore at the foot of the mountains on the other side we
saw a few lights that should be Luino. I saw a wedgelike gap between the mountains
on the other shore and I thought that must be Luino. If it was we were making good
time. I pulled in the oars and lay back on the seat. I was very, very tired of rowing.
My arms and shoulders and back ached and my hands were sore. “I could hold the
umbrella,” Catherine said. “We could sail with that with the wind.” “Can you steer?” “I
think so.” “You take this oar and hold it under your arm close to the side of the boat
and steer and I’ll hold the umbrella.” I went back to the stern and showed her how to
hold the oar. I took the big umbrella the porter had given me and sat facing the bow
and opened it. It opened with a clap. I held it on both sides, sitting astride the handle
hooked over the seat. The wind was full in it and I felt the boat suck forward while I
held as hard as I could to the two edges. It pulled hard. The boat was moving fast.
“We’re going beautifully,” Catherine said. All I could see was umbrella ribs. The
umbrella strained and pulled and I felt us driving along with it. I braced my feet and
held back on it, then suddenly, it buckled; I felt a rib snap on my forehead, I tried to
grab the top that was bending with the wind and the whole thing buckled and went
inside out and I was astride the handle of an inside-out, ripped umbrella, where I had
been holding a wind-filled pulling sail. I unhooked the handle from the seat, laid the
umbrella in the bow and went back to Catherine for the oar. She was laughing. She
took my hand and kept on laughing. “What’s the matter?” I took the oar. “You looked
so funny holding that thing.” “I suppose so.” “Don’t be cross, darling. It was awfully
funny. You looked about twenty feet broad and very affectionate holding the
umbrella by the edges—” she choked. “I’ll row.” “Take a rest and a drink. It’s a grand
night and we’ve come a long way.” “I have to keep the boat out of the trough of the
waves.” “I’ll get you a drink. Then rest a little while, darling.” I held the oars up and
we sailed with them. Catherine was opening the bag. She handed me the brandy
bottle. I pulled the cork with my pocket-knife and took a long drink. It was smooth
and hot and the heat went all through me and I felt warmed and cheerful. “It’s lovely
brandy,” I said. The moon was under again but I could see the shore. There seemed
to be another point going out a long way ahead into the lake. “Are you warm enough,
Cat?” “I’m splendid. I’m a little stiff.” “Bail out that water and you can put your feet
down.” Then I rowed and listened to the oarlocks and the dip and scrape of the
bailing tin under the stern seat. “Would you give me the bailer?” I said. “I want a
drink.”

“A Farewell to Arms” By Ernest Hemingway 117

“It’s awful dirty.” “That’s all right. I’ll rinse it.” I heard Catherine rinsing it over the side.
Then she handed it to me dipped full of water. I was thirsty after the brandy and the
water was icy cold, so cold it made my teeth ache. I looked toward the shore. We
were closer to the long point. There were lights in the bay ahead. “Thanks,” I said
and handed back the tin pail. “You’re ever so welcome,” Catherine said. “There’s
much more if you want it.” “Don’t you want to eat something?” “No. I’ll be hungry in a
little while. We’ll save it till then.” “All right.” What looked like a point ahead was a
long high headland. I went further out in the lake to pass it. The lake was much
narrower now. The moon was out again and the guardia di finanza could have seen
our boat black on the water if they had been watching. “How are you, Cat?” I asked.
“I’m all right. Where are we?” “I don’t think we have more than about eight miles
more.” “That’s a long way to row, you poor sweet. Aren’t you dead?” “No. I’m all
right. My hands are sore is all.” We went on up the lake. There was a break in the
mountains on the right bank, a flattening-out with a low shore line that I thought must
be Cannobio. I stayed a long way out because it was from now on that we ran the
most danger of meeting guardia. There was a high dome-capped mountain on the
other shore a way ahead. I was tired. It was no great distance to row but when you
were out of condition it had been a long way. I knew I had to pass that mountain and
go up the lake at least five miles further before we would be in Swiss water. The
moon was almost down now but before it went down the sky clouded over again and
it was very dark. I stayed well out in the lake, rowing awhile, then resting and holding
the oars so that the wind struck the blades. “Let me row awhile,” Catherine said. “I
don’t think you ought to.” “Nonsense. It would be good for me. It would keep me from
being too stiff.” “I don’t think you should, Cat.” “Nonsense. Rowing in moderation is
very good for the pregnant lady.” “All right, you row a little moderately. I’ll go back,
then you come up. Hold on to both gunwales when you come up.” I sat in the stern
with my coat on and the collar turned up and watched Catherine row. She rowed
very well but the oars were too long and bothered her. I opened the bag and ate a
couple of sandwiches and took a drink of the brandy. It made everything much better
and I took another drink. “Tell me when you’re tired,” I said. Then a little later, “Watch
out the oar doesn’t pop you in the tummy.” “If it did”—Catherine said between
strokes—”life might be much simpler.” I took another drink of the brandy. “How are
you going?” “All right.” “Tell me when you want to stop.” “All right.” I took another
drink of the brandy, then took hold of the two gunwales of the boat and moved
forward. “No. I’m going beautifully.” “Go on back to the stern. I’ve had a grand rest.”
For a while, with the brandy, I rowed easily and steadily. Then I began to catch crabs
and soon I was just chopping along again with a thin brown taste of bile from having
rowed too hard after the brandy. “Give me a drink of water, will you?” I said.

“A Farewell to Arms” By Ernest Hemingway 118

“That’s easy,” Catherine said. Before daylight it started to drizzle. The wind was
down or we were protected by mountains that bounded the curve the lake had made.
When I knew daylight was coming I settled down and rowed hard. I did not know
where we were and I wanted to get into the Swiss part of the lake. When it was
beginning to be daylight we were quite close to the shore. I could see the rocky
shore and the trees. “What’s that?” Catherine said. I rested on the oars and listened.
It was a motor boat chugging out on the lake. I pulled close up to the shore and lay
quiet. The chugging came closer; then we saw the motor boat in the rain a little
astern of us. There were four guardia di finanza in the stern, their alpini hats pulled
down, their cape collars turned up and their carbines slung across their backs. They
all looked sleepy so early in the morning. I could see the yellow on their hats and the
yellow marks on their cape collars. The motor boat chugged on and out of sight in
the rain. I pulled out into the lake. If we were that close to the border I did not want to
be hailed by a sentry along the road. I stayed out where I could just see the shore
and rowed on for three quarters of an hour in the rain. We heard a motor boat once
more but I kept quiet until the noise of the engine went away across the lake. “I think
we’re in Switzerland, Cat,” I said. “Really?” “There’s no way to know until we see
Swiss troops.” “Or the Swiss navy.” “The Swiss navy’s no joke for us. That last motor
boat we heard was probably the Swiss navy.” “If we’re in Switzerland let’s have a big
breakfast. They have wonderful rolls and butter and jam in Switzerland.” It was clear
daylight now and a fine rain was falling. The wind was still blowing outside up the
lake and we could see the tops of the white-caps going away from us and up the
lake. I was sure we were in Switzerland now. There were many houses back in the
trees from the shore and up the shore a way was a village with stone houses, some
villas on the hills and a church. I had been looking at the road that skirted the shore
for guards but did not see any. The road came quite close to the lake now and I saw
a soldier coming out of a café on the road. He wore a gray-green uniform and a
helmet like the Germans. He had a healthy-looking face and a little toothbrush
mustache. He looked at us. “Wave to him,” I said to Catherine. She waved and the
soldier smiled embarrassedly and gave a wave of his hand. I eased up rowing. We
were passing the waterfront of the village. “We must be well inside the border,” I
said. “We want to be sure, darling. We don’t want them to turn us back at the
frontier.” “The frontier is a long way back. I think this is the customs town. I’m pretty
sure it’s Brissago.” “Won’t there be Italians there? There are always both sides at a
customs town.” “Not in war-time. I don’t think they let the Italians cross the frontier.” It
was a nice-looking little town. There were many fishing boats along the quay and
nets were spread on racks. There was a fine November rain falling but it looked
cheerful and clean even with the rain. “Should we land then and have breakfast?”
“All right.” I pulled hard on the left oar and came in close, then straightened out when
we were close to the quay and brought the boat alongside. I pulled in the oars, took
hold of an iron ring, stepped up on the wet stone and was in Switzerland. I tied the
boat and held my hand down to Catherine. “Come on up, Cat. It’s a grand feeling.”
“What about the bags?” “Leave them in the boat.”

“A Farewell to Arms” By Ernest Hemingway 119

Catherine stepped up and we were in Switzerland together. “What a lovely country,”
she said. “Isn’t it grand?” “Let’s go and have breakfast!” “Isn’t it a grand country? I
love the way it feels under my shoes.” “I’m so stiff I can’t feel it very well. But it feels
like a splendid country. Darling, do you realize we’re here and out of that bloody
place?” “I do. I really do. I’ve never realized anything before.” “Look at the houses.
Isn’t this a fine square? There’s a place we can get breakfast.” “Isn’t the rain fine?
They never had rain like this in Italy. It’s cheerful rain.” “And we’re here, darling! Do
you realize we’re here?” We went inside the café and sat down at a clean wooden
table. We were cockeyed excited. A splendid clean-looking woman with an apron
came and asked us what we wanted. “Rolls and jam and coffee,” Catherine said.
“I’m sorry, we haven’t any rolls in war-time.” “Bread then.” “I can make you some
toast.” “All right.” “I want some eggs fried too.” “How many eggs for the gentleman?”
“Three.” “Take four, darling.” “Four eggs.” The woman went away. I kissed Catherine
and held her hand very tight. We looked at each other and at the café. “Darling,
darling, isn’t it lovely?” “It’s grand,” I said. “I don’t mind there not being rolls,”
Catherine said. “I thought about them all night. But I don’t mind it. I don’t mind it at
all.” “I suppose pretty soon they will arrest us.” “Never mind, darling. We’ll have
breakfast first. You won’t mind being arrested after breakfast. And then there’s
nothing they can do to us. We’re British and American citizens in good standing.”
“You have a passport, haven’t you?” “Of course. Oh let’s not talk about it. Let’s be
happy.” “I couldn’t be any happiei” I said. A fat gray cat with a tail that lifted like a
plume crossed the floor to our table and curved against my leg to purr each time she
rubbed. I reached down and stroked her. Catherine smiled at me very happily. “Here
comes the coffee,” she said. They arrested us after breakfast. We took a little walk
through the village then went down to the quay to get our bags. A soldier was
standing guard over the boat. “Is this your boat?” “Yes.” “Where do you come from?”
“Up the lake.” “Then I have to ask you to come with me.” “How about the bags?”
“You can carry the bags.” I carried the bags and Catherine walked beside me and
the soldier walked along behind us to the old custom house. In the custom house a
lieutenant, very thin and military, questioned us. “What nationality are you?”
“American and British.” “Let me see your passports.”

“A Farewell to Arms” By Ernest Hemingway 120

I gave him mine and Catherine got hers out of her handbag. He examined them for a
long time. “Why do you enter Switzerland this way in a boat?” “I am a sportsman,” I
said. “Rowing is my great sport. I always row when I get a chance.” “Why do you
come here?” “For the winter sport. We are tourists and we want to do the winter
sport.” “This is no place for winter sport.” “We know it. We want to go where they
have the winter sport.” “What have you been doing in Italy?” “I have been studying
architecture. My cousin has been studying art.” “Why do you leave there?” “We want
to do the winter sport. With the war going on you cannot study architecture.” “You
will please stay where you are,” the lieutenant said. He went back into the building
with our passports. “You’re splendid, darling,” Catherine said. “Keep on the same
track. You want to do the winter sport.” “Do you know anything about art?” “Rubens,”
said Catherine. “Large and fat,” I said. “Titian,” Catherine said. “Titian-haired,” I said.
“How about Mantegna?” “Don’t ask hard ones,” Catherine said. “I know him
though— very bitter.” “Very bitter,” I said. “Lots of nail holes.” “You see I’ll make you
a fine wife,” Catherine said. “I’ll be able to talk art with your customers.” “Here he
comes,” I said. The thin lieutenant came down the length of the custom house,
holding our passports. “I will have to send you into Locarno,” he said. “You can get a
carriage and a soldier will go in with you.” “All right,” I said. “What about the boat?”
“The boat is confiscated. What have you in those bags?” He went all through the two
bags and held up the quarterbottle of brandy. “Would you join me in a drink?” I
asked. “No thank you.” He straightened up. “How much money have you?” “Twentyfive hundred lire.” He was favorably impressed. “How much has your cousin?”
Catherine had a little over twelve hundred lire. The lieutenant was pleased. His
attitude toward us became less haughty. “If you are going for winter sports,” he said,
“Wengen is the place. My father has a very fine hotel at Wengen. It is open all the
time.” “That’s splendid,” I said. “Could you give me the name?” “I will write it on a
card.” He handed me the card very politely. “The soldier will take you into Locarno.
He will keep your passports. I regret this but it is necessary. I have good hopes they
will give you a visa or a police permit at Locarno.” He handed the two passports to
the soldier and carrying the bags we started into the village to order a carriage. “Hi,”
the lieutenant called to the soldier. He said something in a German dialect to him.
The soldier slung his rifle on his back and picked up the bags. “It’s a great country,” I
said to Catherine. “It’s so practical.” “Thank you very much,” I said to the lieutenant.
He waved his hand. “Service!” he said. We followed our guard into the village. We
drove to Locarno in a carriage with the soldier sitting on the front seat with the driver.
At Locarno we did not have a bad time. They questioned us but they were polite
because we had passports and money. I do not think they believed a word of the
story

“A Farewell to Arms” By Ernest Hemingway 121

and I thought it was silly but it was like a law-court. You did not want something
reasonable, you wanted something technical and then stuck to it without
explanations. But we had passports and we would spend the money. So they gave
us provisional visas. At any time this visa might be withdrawn. We were to report to
the police wherever we went. Could we go wherever we wanted? Yes. Where did we
want to go? “Where do you want to go, Cat?” “Montreux.” “It is a very nice place,” the
official said. “I think you will like that place.” “Here at Locarno is a very nice place,”
another official said. “I am sure you would like it here very much at Locarno. Locarno
is a very attractive place.” “We would like some place where there is winter sport.”
“There is no winter sport at Montreux.” “I beg your pardon,” the other official said. “I
come from Montreux. There is very certainly winter sport on the Montreux Oberland
Bernois railway. It would be false for you to deny that.” “I do not deny it. I simply said
there is no winter sport at Montreux.” “I question that,” the other official said. “I
question that statement.” “I hold to that statement.” “I question that statement. I
myself have luge-ed into the streets of Montreux. I have done it not once but several
times. Luge-ing is certainly winter sport.” The other official turned to me. “Is luge-ing
your idea of winter sport, sir? I tell you you would be very comfortable here in
Locarno. You would find the climate healthy, you would find the environs attractive.
You would like it very much.” “The gentleman has expressed a wish to go to
Montreux.” “What is luge-ing?” I asked. “You see he has never even heard of lugeing!” That meant a great deal to the second official. He was pleased by that. “Lugeing,” said the first official, “is tobogganing.” “I beg to differ,” the other official shook
his head. “I must differ again. The toboggan is very different from the luge. The
toboggan is constructed in Canada of flat laths. The luge is a common sled with
runners. Accuracy means something.” “Couldn’t we toboggan?” I asked. “Of course
you could toboggan,” the first official said. “You could toboggan very well. Excellent
Canadian toboggans are sold in Montreux. Ochs Brothers sell toboggans. They
import their own toboggans.” The second official turned away. “Tobogganing,” he
said, “requires a special piste. You could not toboggan into the streets of Montreux.
Where are you stopping here?” “We don’t know,” I said. “We just drove in from
Brissago. The carriage is outside.” “You make no mistake in going to Montreux,” the
first official said. “You will find the climate delightful and beautiful. You will have no
distance to go for winter sport.” “If you really want winter sport,” the second official
said, “you will go to the Engadine or to Mürren. I must protest against your being
advised to go to Montreux for the winter sport.” “At Les Avants above Montreux there
is excellent winter sport of every sort.” The champion of Montreux glared at his
colleague. “Gentlemen,” I said, “I am afraid we must go. My cousin is very tired. We
will go tentatively to Montreux.” “I congratulate you,” the first official shook my hand.
“I believe that you will regret leaving Locarno,” the second official said. “At any rate
you will report to the police at Montreux.” “There will be no unpleasantness with the
police,” the first official assured me. “You

“A Farewell to Arms” By Ernest Hemingway 122

will find all the inhabitants extremely courteous and friendly.” “Thank you both very
much,” I said. “We appreciate your advice very much.” “Good-by,” Catherine said.
“Thank you both very much.” They bowed us to the dooi the champion of Locarno a
little coldly. We went down the steps and into the carriage. “My God, darling,”
Catherine said. “Couldn’t we have gotten away any sooner?” I gave the name of a
hotel one of the officials had recommended to the driver. He picked up the reins.
“You’ve forgotten the army,” Catherine said. The soldier was standing by the
carriage. I gave him a ten-lira note. “I have no Swiss money yet,” I said. He thanked
me, saluted and went off. The carriage started and we drove to the hotel. “How did
you happen to pick out Montreux?” I asked Catherine. “Do you really want to go
there?” “It was the first place I could think of,” she said. “It’s not a bad place. We can
find some place up in the mountains.” “Are you sleepy?” “I’m asleep right now.”
“We’ll get a good sleep. Poor Cat, you had a long bad night.” “I had a lovely time,”
Catherine said. “Especially when you sailed with the umbrella.” “Can you realize
we’re in Switzerland?” “No, I’m afraid I’ll wake up and it won’t be true.” “I am too.” “It
is true, isn’t it, darling? I’m not just driving down to the stazione in Milan to see you
off.” “I hope not.” “Don’t say that. It frightens me. Maybe that’s where we’re going.”
“I’m so groggy I don’t know,” I said. “Let me see your hands.” I put them out. They
were both blistered raw. “There’s no hole in my side,” I said. “Don’t be sacrilegious.” I
felt very tired and vague in the head. The exhilaration was all gone. The carriage
was going along the Street. “Poor hands,” Catherine said. “Don’t touch them,” I said.
“By God I don’t know where we are. Where are we going, driver?” The driver
stopped his horse. “To the Hotel Metropole. Don’t you want to go there?” “Yes,” I
said. “It’s all right, Cat.” “It’s all right, darling. Don’t be upset. We’ll get a good sleep
and you won’t feel groggy to-morrow.” “I get pretty groggy,” I said. “It’s like a comic
opera to-day. Maybe I’m hungry.” “You’re just tired, darling. You’ll be fine.” The
carriage pulled up before the hotel. Some one came out to take our bags. “I feel all
right,” I said. We were down on the pavement going into the hotel. “I know you’ll be
all right. You’re just tired. You’ve been up a long time.” “Anyhow we’re here.” “Yes,
we’re really here.” We followed the boy with the bags into the hotel.
Book Five
38
That fall the snow came very late. We lived in a brown wooden house in the pine
trees on the side of the mountain and at night there was frost so that there was thin
ice over
“A Farewell to Arms” By Ernest Hemingway 123

the water in the two pitchers on the dresser in the morning. Mrs. Guttingen came into
the room early in the morning to shut the windows and started a fire in the tall
porcelain stove. The pine wood crackled and sparked and then the fire roared in the
stove and the second time Mrs. Guttingen came into the room she brought big
chunks of wood for the fire and a pitcher of hot water. When the room was warm she
brought in breakfast. Sitting up in bed eating breakfast we could see the lake and the
mountains across the lake on the French side. There was snow on the tops of the
mountains and the lake was a gray steel-blue. Outside, in front of the chalet a road
went up the mountain. The wheel ruts and ridges were iron hard with the frost, and
the road climbed steadily through the forest and up and around the mountain to
where there were meadows, and barns and cabins in the meadows at the edge of
the woods looking across the valley. The valley was deep and there was a stream at
the bottom that flowed down into the lake and when the wind blew across the valley
you could hear the stream in the rocks. Sometimes we went off the road and on a
path through the pine forest. The floor of the forest was soft to walk on; the frost did
not harden it as it did the road. But we did not mind the hardness of the road
because we had nails in the soles and heels of our boots and the heel nails bit on
the frozen ruts and with nailed boots it was good walking on the road and
invigorating. But it was lovely walking in the woods. In front of the house where we
lived the mountain went down steeply to the little plain along the lake and we sat on
the porch of the house in the sun and saw the winding of the road down the
mountain-side and the terraced vineyards on the side of the lower mountain, the
vines all dead now for the winter and the fields divided by stone walls, and below the
vineyards the houses of the town on the narrow plain along the lake shore. There
was an island with two trees on the lake and the trees looked like the double sails of
a fishing-boat. The mountains were sharp and steep on the other side of the lake
and down at the end of the lake was the plain of the Rhone Valley flat between the
two ranges of mountains; and up the valley where the mountains cut it off was the
Dent du Midi. It was a high snowy mountain and it dominated the valley but it was so
far away that it did not make a shadow. When the sun was bright we ate lunch on
the porch but the rest of the time we ate upstairs in a small room with plain wooden
walls and a big stove in the corner. We bought books and magazines in the town
and a copy of “Hoyle” and learned many two-handed card games. The small room
with the stove was our living-room. There were two comfortable chairs and a table
for books and magazines and we played cards on the dining-table when it was
cleared away. Mr. and Mrs. Guttingen lived downstairs and we would hear them
talking sometimes in the evening and they were very happy together too. He had
been a headwaiter and she had worked as maid in the same hotel and they had
saved their money to buy this place. They had a son who was studying to be a
headwaiter. He was at a hotel in Zurich. Downstairs there was a parlor where they
sold wine and beer, and sometimes in the evening we would hear carts stop outside
on the road and men come up the steps to go in the parlor to drink wine. There was
a box of wood in the hall outside the living-room and I kept up the fire from it. But we
did not stay up very late. We went to bed in the dark in the big bedroom and when I
was undressed I opened the windows and saw the night and the cold stars and the
pine trees below the window and then got into bed as fast as I could. It was lovely in
bed with the air so cold and clear and the night outside the window. We slept well
and if I woke in the night I knew it was from only one cause and I would shift the
feather bed over, very softly so that Catherine would not be wakened and then go
back to sleep again, warm and with the new lightness of thin covers. The war
seemed as far away as the football games of some one else’s college. But I knew
from the papers that they were still fighting in the mountains because the snow
would not come. Sometimes we walked down the mountain into Montreux. There
was a path went down the mountain but it was steep and so usually we took the road
and walked down on the wide hard road between fields and then below between the
stone walls of the

“A Farewell to Arms” By Ernest Hemingway 124

vineyards and on down between the houses of the villages along the way. There
were three villages; Chernex, Fontanivent, and the other I forget. Then along the
road we passed an old square-built stone château on a ledge on the side of the
mountain-side with the terraced fields of vines, each vine tied to a stick to hold it up,
the vines dry and brown and the earth ready for the snow and the lake down below
flat and gray as steel. The road went down a long grade below the château and then
turned to the right and went down very steeply and paved with cobbles, into
Montreux. We did not know any one in Montreux. We walked along beside the lake
and saw the swans and the many gulls and terns that flew up when you came close
and screamed while they looked down at the water. Out on the lake there were
flocks of grebes, small and dark, and leaving trails in the water when they swam. In
the town we walked along the main street and looked in the windows of the shops.
There were many big hotels that were closed but most of the shops were open and
the people were very glad to see us. There was a fine coiffeur’s place where
Catherine went to have her hair done. The woman who ran it was very cheerful and
the only person we knew in Montreux. While Catherine was there I went up to a beer
place and drank dark Munich beer and read the papers. I read the Corriere della
Sera and the English and American papers from Paris. All the advertisements were
blacked out, supposedly to prevent communication in that way with the enemy. The
papers were bad reading. Everything was going very badly everywhere. I sat back in
the corner with a heavy mug of dark beer and an opened glazed-paper package of
pretzels and ate the pretzels for the salty flavor and the good way they made the
beer taste and read about disaster. I thought Catherine would come by but she did
not come, so I hung the papers back on the rack, paid for my beer and went up the
street to look for her. The day was cold and dark and wintry and the stone of the
houses looked cold. Catherine was still in the hairdresser’s shop. The woman was
waving her hair. I sat in the little booth and watched. It was exciting to watch and
Catherine smiled and talked to me and my voice was a little thick from being excited.
The tongs made a pleasant clicking sound and I could see Catherine in three mirrors
and it was pleasant and warm in the booth. Then the woman put up Catherine’s hair,
and Catherine looked in the mirror and changed it a little, taking out and putting in
pins; then stood up. “I’m sorry to have taken such a long time.” “Monsieur was very
interested. Were you not, monsieur?” the woman smiled. “Yes,” I said. We went out
and up the street. It was cold and wintry and the wind was blowing. “Oh, darling, I
love you so,” I said. “Don’t we have a fine time?” Catherine said. “Look. Let’s go
some place and have beer instead of tea. It’s very good for young Catherine. It
keeps her small.” “Young Catherine,” I said. “That loafer.” “She’s been very good,”
Catherine said. “She makes very little trouble. The doctor says beer will be good for
me and keep her small.” “If you keep her small enough and she’s a boy, maybe he
will be a jockey.” “I suppose if we really have this child we ought to get married,”
Catherine said. We were in the beer place at the corner table. It was getting dark
outside. It was still early but the day was dark and the dusk was coming early. “Let’s
get married now,” I said. “No,” Catherine said. “It’s too embarrassing now. I show too
plainly. I won’t go before any one and be married in this state.” “I wish we’d gotten
married.” “I suppose it would have been better. But when could we, darling?” “I don’t
know.” “I know one thing. I’m not going to be married in this splendid matronly state.”
“You’re not matronly.” “Oh yes, I am, darling. The hairdresser asked me if this was
our first. I lied and said no, we had two boys and two girls.”

“A Farewell to Arms” By Ernest Hemingway 125

“When will we be married?” “Any time after I’m thin again. We want to have a
splendid wedding with every one thinking what a handsome young couple.” “And
you’re not worried?” “Darling, why should I be worried? The only time I ever felt
badly was when I felt like a whore in Milan and that only lasted seven minutes and
besides it was the room furnishings. Don’t I make you a good wife?” “You’re a lovely
wife.” “Then don’t be too technical, darling. I’ll marry you as soon as I’m thin again.”
“All right.” “Do you think I ought to drink another beer? The doctor said I was rather
narrow in the hips and it’s all for the best if we keep young Catherine small.” “What
else did he say?” I was worried. “Nothing. I have a wonderful blood-pressure,
darling. He admired my blood-pressure greatly.” “What did he say about you being
too narrow in the hips?” “Nothing. Nothing at all. He said I shouldn’t ski.” “Quite
right.” “He said it was too late to start if I’d never done it before. He said I could ski if
I wouldn’t fall down.” “He’s just a big-hearted joker.” “Really he was very nice. We’ll
have him when the baby comes.” “Did you ask him if you ought to get married?” “No.
I told him we’d been married four years. You see, darling, if I marry you I’ll be an
American and any time we’re married under American law the child is legitimate.”
“Where did you find that out?” “In the New York World Almanac in the library.”
“You’re a grand girl.” “I’ll be very glad to be an American and we’ll go to America
won’t we, darling? I want to see Niagara Falls.” “You’re a fine girl.” “There’s
something else I want to see but I can’t remember it.” “The stockyards?” “No. I can’t
remember it.” “The Woolworth building?” ‘‘No.” “The Grand Canyon?” “No. But I’d
like to see that.” “What was it?” “The Golden Gate! That’s what I want to see. Where
is the Golden Gate?” “San Francisco.” “Then let’s go there. I want to see San
Francisco anyway.” “All right. We’ll go there.” “Now let’s go up the mountain. Should
we? Can we get the M.O.B.?” “There’s a train a little after five.” “Let’s get that.” “All
right. I’ll drink one more beer first.” When we went out to go up the street and climb
the stairs to the station it was very cold. A cold wind was coming down the Rhone
Valley. There were lights in the shop windows and we climbed the steep stone
stairway to the upper street, then up another stairs to the station. The electric train
was there waiting, all the lights on. There was a dial that showed when it left. The
clock hands pointed to ten minutes after five. I looked at the station clock. It was five
minutes after. As we got on board I saw the motorman and conductor coming out of
the station wine-shop. We sat down and opened the window. The train was
electrically heated and stuffy but fresh cold air came in through

“A Farewell to Arms” By Ernest Hemingway 126

the window. “Are you tired, Cat?” I asked. “No. I feel splendid.” “It isn’t a long ride.” “I
like the ride,” she said. “Don’t worry about me, darling. I feel fine.” Snow did not
come until three days before Christmas. We woke one morning and it was snowing.
We stayed in bed with the fire roaring in the stove and watched the snow fall. Mrs.
Guttingen took away the breakfast trays and put more wood in the stove. It was a big
snow storm. She said it had started about midnight. I went to the window and looked
out but could not see across the road. It was blowing and snowing wildly. I went back
to bed and we lay and talked. “I wish I could ski,” Catherine said. “It’s rotten not to be
able to ski.” “We’ll get a bobsled and come down the road. That’s no worse for you
than riding in a car.” “Won’t it be rough?” “We can see.” “I hope it won’t be too
rough.” “After a while we’ll take a walk in the snow.” “Before lunch,” Catherine said,
“so we’ll have a good appetite.” “I’m always hungry.” “So am I.” We went out in the
snow but it was drifted so that we could not walk far. I went ahead and made a trail
down to the station but when we reached there we had gone far enough. The snow
was blowing so we could hardly see and we went into the little inn by the station and
swept each other off with a broom and sat on a bench and had vermouths. “It is a big
storm,” the barmaid said. “Yes.” “The snow is very late this year.” “Yes.” “Could I eat
a chocolate bar?” Catherine asked. “Or is it too close to lunch? I’m always hungry.”
“Go on and eat one,” I said. “I’ll take one with filberts,” Catherine said. “They are very
good,” the girl said, “I like them the best.” “I’ll have another vermouth,” I said. When
we came out to start back up the road our track was filled in by the snow. There
were only faint indentations where the holes had been. The snow blew in our faces
so we could hardly see. We brushed off and went in to have lunch. Mr. Guttingen
served the lunch. “To-morrow there will be ski-ing,” he said. “Do you ski, Mr. Henry?”
“No. But I want to learn.” “You will learn very easily. My boy will be here for
Christmas and he will teach you.” “That’s fine. When does he come?” “To-morrow
night.” When we were sitting by the stove in the little room after lunch looking out the
window at the snow coming down Catherine said, “Wouldn’t you like to go on a trip
somewhere by yourself, darling, and be with men and ski?” “No. Why should I?” “I
should think sometimes you would want to see other people besides me.” “Do you
want to see other people?” “No.” “Neither do I.” “I know. But you’re different. I’m
having a child and that makes me contented not to do anything. I know I’m awfully
stupid now and I talk too much and I think you ought to get

“A Farewell to Arms” By Ernest Hemingway 127

away so you won’t be tired of me.” “Do you want me to go away?” “No. I want you to
stay.” “That’s what I’m going to do.” “Come over here,” she said. “I want to feel the
bump on your head. It’s a big bump.” She ran her finger over it. “Darling, would you
like to grow a beard?” “Would you like me to?” “It might be fun. I’d like to see you
with a beard.” “All right. I’ll grow one. I’ll start now this minute. It’s a good idea. It will
give me something to do.” “Are you worried because you haven’t anything to do?”
“No. I like it. I have a fine life. Don’t you?” “I have a lovely life. But I was afraid
because I’m big now that maybe I was a bore to you.” “Oh, Cat. You don’t know how
crazy I am about you.” “This way?” “Just the way you are. I have a fine time. Don’t
we have a good life?” “I do, but I thought maybe you were restless.” “No. Sometimes
I wonder about the front and about people I know but I don’t worry. I don’t think
about anything much.” “Who do you wonder about?” “About Rinaldi and the priest
and lots of people I know. But I don’t think about them much. I don’t want to think
about the war. I’m through with it.” “What are you thinking about now?” “Nothing.”
“Yes you were. Tell me.” “I was wondering whether Rinaldi had the syphilis.” “Was
that all?” “Yes.” “Has he the syphilis?” “I don’t know.” “I’m glad you haven’t. Did you
ever have anything like that?” “I had gonorrhea.” “I don’t want to hear about it. Was it
very painful, darling?” “Very.” “I wish I’d had it.” “No you don’t.” “I do. I wish I’d had it
to be like you. I wish I’d stayed with all your girls so I could make fun of them to you.”
“That’s a pretty picture.” “It’s not a pretty picture you having gonorrhea.” “I know it.
Look at it snow now.” “I’d rather look at you. Darling, why don’t you let your hair
grow?” “How grow?” “Just grow a little longer.” “It’s long enough now.” “No, let it
grow a little longer and I could cut mine and we’d be just alike only one of us blonde
and one of us dark.” “I wouldn’t let you cut yours.” “It would be fun. I’m tired of it. It’s
an awful nuisance in the bed at night.” “I like it.” “Wouldn’t you like it short?” “I might.
I like it the way it is.” “It might be nice short. Then we’d both be alike. Oh, darling, I
want you so much I want to be you too.”

“A Farewell to Arms” By Ernest Hemingway 128

“You are. We’re the same one.” “I know it. At night we are.” “The nights are grand.” “I
want us to be all mixed up. I don’t want you to go away. I just said that. You go if you
want to. But hurry right back. Why, darling, I don’t live at all when I’m not with you.” “I
won’t ever go away,” I said. “I’m no good when you’re not there. I haven’t any life at
all any more.” “I want you to have a life. I want you to have a fine life. But we’ll have
it together, won’t we?” “And now do you want me to stop growing my beard or let it
go on?” “Go on. Grow it. It will be exciting. Maybe it will be done for New Year’s.”
“Now do you want to play chess?” “I’d rather play with you.” “No. Let’s play chess.”
“And afterward we’ll play?” “Yes.” “All right.” I got out the chess-board and arranged
the pieces. It was still snowing hard outside. One time in the night I woke up and
knew that Catherine was awake too. The moon was shining in the window and made
shadows on the bed from the bars on the window-panes. “Are you awake,
sweetheart?” “Yes. Can’t you sleep?” “I just woke up thinking about how I was nearly
crazy when I first met you. Do you remember?” “You were just a little crazy.” “I’m
never that way any more. I’m grand now. You say grand so sweetly. Say grand.”
“Grand.” “Oh, you’re sweet. And I’m not crazy now. I’m just very, very, very happy.”
“Go on to sleep,” I said. “All right. Let’s go to sleep at exactly the same moment.” “All
right.” But we did not. I was awake for quite a long time thinking about things and
watching Catherine sleeping, the moonlight on her face. Then I went to sleep, too.
39
By the middle of January I had a beard and the winter had settled into bright cold
days and hard cold nights. We could walk on the roads again. The snow was packed
hard and smooth by the hay-sleds and wood-sledges and the logs that were hauled
down the mountain. The snow lay over all the country, down almost to Montreux.
The mountains on the other side of the lake were all white and the plain of the
Rhone Valley was covered. We took long walks on the other side of the mountain to
the Bains de l’Alliaz. Catherine wore hobnailed boots and a cape and carried a stick
with a sharp steel point. She did not look big with the cape and we would not walk
too fast but stopped and sat on logs by the roadside to rest when she was tired.
There was an inn in the trees at the Bains de l’Alliaz where the woodcutters stopped
to drink, and we sat inside warmed by the stove and drank hot red wine with spices
and lemon in it. They called it gluhwein and it was a good thing to warm you and to
celebrate with. The inn was dark and smoky inside and afterward when you went out
the cold air came sharply into your lungs and numbed the edge of your nose as you
inhaled. We looked back at the inn with light coming from the windows and the
woodcutters’ horses stamping and jerking their heads outside to keep warm. There
was frost on the hairs of their muzzles and their breathing made plumes of frost in
the air. Going up the road toward home the road was smooth and slippery for a while
and the ice orange from the
“A Farewell to Arms” By Ernest Hemingway 129

horses until the wood-hauling track turned off. Then the road was clean-packed
snow and led through the woods, and twice coming home in the evening, we saw
foxes. It was a fine country and every time that we went out it was fun. “You have a
splendid beard now,” Catherine said. “It looks just like the woodcutters’. Did you see
the man with the tiny gold earrings?” “He’s a chamois hunter,” I said. “They wear
them because they say it makes them hear better.” “Really? I don’t believe it. I think
they wear them to show they are chamois hunters. Are there chamois near here?”
“Yes, beyond the Dent de Jaman.” “It was fun seeing the fox.” “When he sleeps he
wraps that tail around him to keep warm.” “It must be a lovely feeling.” “I always
wanted to have a tail like that. Wouldn’t it be fun if we had brushes like a fox?” “It
might be very difficult dressing.” “We’d have clothes made, or live in a country where
it wouldn’t make any difference.” “We live in a country where nothing makes any
difference. Isn’t it grand how we never see any one? You don’t want to see people
do you, darling?” “No.” “Should we sit here just a minute? I’m a little bit tired.” We sat
close together on the logs. Ahead the road went down through the forest. “She won’t
come between us, will she? The little brat.” “No. We won’t let her.” “How are we for
money?” “We have plenty. They honored the last sight draft.” “Won’t your family try
and get hold of you now they know you’re in Switzerland?” “Probably. I’ll write them
something.” “Haven’t you written them?” “No. Only the sight draft.” “Thank God I’m
not your family.” “I’ll send them a cable.” “Don’t you care anything about them?” “I
did, but we quarrelled so much it wore itself out.” “I think I’d like them. I’d probably
like them very much.” “Let’s not talk about them or I’ll start to worry about them.”
After a while I said, “Let’s go on if you’re rested.” “I’m rested.” We went on down the
road. It was dark now and the snow squeaked under our boots. The night was dry
and cold and very clear. “I love your beard,” Catherine said. “It’s a great success. It
looks so stiff and fierce and it’s very soft and a great pleasure.” “Do you like it better
than without?” “I think so. You know, darling, I’m not going to cut my hair now until
after young Catherine’s born. I look too big and matronly now. But after she’s born
and I’m thin again I’m going to cut it and then I’ll be a fine new and different girl for
you. We’ll go together and get it cut, or I’ll go alone and come and surprise you.” I
did not say anything. “You won’t say I can’t, will you?” “No. I think it would be
exciting.” “Oh, you’re so sweet. And maybe I’d look lovely, darling, and be so thin
and exciting to you and you’ll fall in love with me all over again.” “Hell,” I said, “I love
you enough now. What do you want to do? Ruin me?” “Yes. I want to ruin you.”
“Good,” I said, “that’s what I want too.”

“A Farewell to Arms” By Ernest Hemingway 130

40
We had a fine life. We lived through the months of January and February and the
winter was very fine and we were very happy. There had been short thaws when the
wind blew warm and the snow softened and the air felt like spring, but always the
clear hard cold had come again and the winter had returned. In March came the first
break in the winter. In the night it started raining. It rained on all morning and turned
the snow to slush and made the mountain-side dismal. There were clouds over the
lake and over the valley. It was raining high up the mountain. Catherine wore heavy
overshoes and I wore Mr. Guttingen’s rubber-boots and we walked to the station
under an umbrella, through the slush and the running water that was washing the ice
of the roads bare, to stop at the pub before lunch for a vermouth. Outside we could
hear the rain. “Do you think we ought to move into town?” “What do you think?”
Catherine asked. “If the winter is over and the rain keeps up it won’t be fun up here.
How long is it before young Catherine?” “About a month. Perhaps a little more.” “We
might go down and stay in Montreux.” “Why don’t we go to Lausanne? That’s where
the hospital is.” “All right. But I thought maybe that was too big a town.” “We can be
as much alone in a bigger town and Lausanne might be nice.” “When should we
go?” “I don’t care. Whenever you want, darling. I don’t want to leave here if you don’t
want.” “Let’s see how the weather turns out.” It rained for three days. The snow was
all gone now on the mountain-side below the station. The road was a torrent of
muddy snow-water. It was too wet and slushy to go out. On the morning of the third
day of rain we decided to go down into town. “That is all right, Mr. Henry,” Guttingen
said. “You do not have to give me any notice. I did not think you would want to stay
now the bad weather is come.” “We have to be near the hospital anyway on account
of Madame,” I said. “I understand,” he said. “Will you come back some time and
stay, with the little one?” “Yes, if you would have room.” “In the spring when it is nice
you could come and enjoy it. We could put the little one and the nurse in the big
room that is closed now and you and Madame could have your same room looking
out over the lake.” “I’ll write about coming,” I said. We packed and left on the train
that went down after lunch. Mr. and Mrs. Guttingen came down to the station with us
and he hauled our baggage down on a sled through the slush. They stood beside
the station in the rain waving good-by. “They were very sweet,” Catherine said.
“They were fine to us.” We took the train to Lausanne from Montreux. Looking out
the window toward where we had lived you could not see the mountains for the
clouds. The train stopped in Vevey, then went on, passing the lake on one side and
on the other the wet brown fields and the bare woods and the wet houses. We came
into Lausanne and went into a medium-sized hotel to stay. It was still raining as we
drove through the streets and into the carriage entrance of the hotel. The concierge
with brass keys on his lapels, the elevator, the carpets on the floors, and the white
washbowls with shining fixtures, the brass bed and the big comfortable bedroom all
seemed very great luxury after the Guttingens. The windows of the room looked out
on a wet garden with a wall topped by an iron fence. Across the street, which sloped
steeply, was another hotel with a similar wall and garden. I looked out at the rain
falling in the fountain of the garden. Catherine turned on all the lights and
commenced unpacking. I ordered a whiskey and soda and lay on the bed and read
the papers I had bought at the station. It was March, 1918, and the German
offensive had started in France. I drank the whiskey and soda
“A Farewell to Arms” By Ernest Hemingway 131

and read while Catherine unpacked and moved around the room. “You know what I
have to get, darling,” she said. “What?” “Baby clothes. There aren’t many people
reach my time without baby things.” “You can buy them.” “I know. That’s what I’ll do
to-morrow. I’ll find out what is necessary.” “You ought to know. You were a nurse.”
“But so few of the soldiers had babies in the hospitals.” “I did.” She hit me with the
pillow and spilled the whiskey and soda. “I’ll order you another,” she said. “I’m sorry I
spilled it.” “There wasn’t much left. Come on over to the bed.” “No. I have to try and
make this room look like something.” “Like what?” “Like our home.” “Hang out the
Allied flags.” “Oh shut up.” “Say it again.” “Shut up.” “You say it so cautiously,” I said.
“As though you didn’t want to offend any one.” “I don’t.” “Then come over to the bed.”
“All right.” She came and sat on the bed. “I know I’m no fun for you, darling. I’m like a
big flour-barrel.” “No you’re not. You’re beautiful and you’re sweet.” “I’m just
something very ungainly that you’ve married.” “No you’re not. You’re more beautiful
all the time.” “But I will be thin again, darling.” “You’re thin now.” “You’ve been
drinking.” “Just whiskey and soda.” “There’s another one coming,” she said. “And
then should we order dinner up here?” “That will be good.” “Then we won’t go out,
will we? We’ll just stay in to-night.” “And play,” I said. “I’ll drink some wine,” Catherine
said. “It won’t hurt me. Maybe we can get some of our old white capri.” “I know we
can,” I said. “They’ll have Italian wines at a hotel this size.” The waiter knocked at the
door. He brought the whiskey in a glass with ice and beside the glass on a tray a
small bottle of soda. “Thank you,” I said. “Put it down there. Will you please have
dinner for two brought up here and two bottles of dry white capri in ice.” “Do you wish
to commence your dinner with soup?” “Do you want soup, Cat?” “Please.” “Bring
soup for one.” “Thank you, sir.” He went out and shut the door. I went back to the
papers and the war in the papers and poured the soda slowly over the ice into the
whiskey. I would have to tell them not to put ice in the whiskey. Let them bring the
ice separately. That way you could tell how much whiskey there was and it would not
suddenly be too thin from the soda. I would get a bottle of whiskey and have them
bring ice and soda. That was the sensible way. Good whiskey was very pleasant. It
was one of the pleasant parts of life. “What are you thinking, darling?” “About
whiskey.” “What about whiskey?”

“A Farewell to Arms” By Ernest Hemingway 132

“About how nice it is.” Catherine made a face. “All right,” she said. We stayed at that
hotel three weeks. It was not bad; the diningroom was usually empty and very often
we ate in our room at night. We walked in the town and took the cogwheel railway
down to Ouchy and walked beside the lake. The weather became quite warm and it
was like spring. We wished we were back in the mountains but the spring weather
lasted only a few days and then the cold rawness of the breaking-up of winter came
again. Catherine bought the things she needed for the baby, up in the town. I went to
a gymnasium in the arcade to box for exercise. I usually went up there in the
morning while Catherine stayed late in bed. On the days of false spring it was very
nice, after boxing and taking a shower, to walk along the streets smelling the spring
in the air and stop at a café to sit and watch the people and read the paper and drink
a vermouth; then go down to the hotel and have lunch with Catherine. The professor
at the boxing gymnasium wore mustaches and was very precise and jerky and went
all to pieces if you started after him. But it was pleasant in the gym. There was good
air and light and I worked quite hard, skipping rope, shadowboxing, doing abdominal
exercises lying on the floor in a patch of sunlight that came through the open
window, and occasionally scaring the professor when we boxed. I could not shadowbox in front of the narrow long mirror at first because it looked so strange to see a
man with a beard boxing. But finally I just thought it was funny. I wanted to take off
the beard as soon as I started boxing but Catherine did not want me to. Sometimes
Catherine and I went for rides out in the country in a carriage. It was nice to ride
when the days were pleasant and we found two good places where we could ride
out to eat. Catherine could not walk very far now and I loved to ride out along the
country roads with her. When there was a good day we had a splendid time and we
never had a bad time. We knew the baby was very close now and it gave us both a
feeling as though something were hurrying us and we could not lose any time
together.
41
One morning I awoke about three o’clock hearing Catherine stirring in the bed. “Are
you all right, Cat?” “I’ve been having some pains, darling.” “Regularly?” “No, not
very.” “If you have them at all regularly we’ll go to the hospital.” I was very sleepy
and went back to sleep. A little while later I woke again. “Maybe you’d better call up
the doctor,” Catherine said. “I think maybe this is it.” I went to the phone and called
the doctor. “How often are the pains coming?” he asked. “How often are they
coming, Cat?” “I should think every quarter of an hour.” “You should go to the
hospital, then,” the doctor said. “I will dress and go there right away myself.” I hung
up and called the garage near the station to send up a taxi. No one answered the
phone for a long time. Then I finally got a man who promised to send up a taxi at
once. Catherine was dressing. Her bag was all packed with the things she would
need at the hospital and the baby things. Outside in the hall I rang for the elevator.
There was no answer. I went downstairs. There was no one downstairs except the
night-watchman. I brought the elevator up myself, put Catherine’s bag in it, she
stepped in and we went down. The night-watchman opened the door for us and we
sat outside on the stone slabs beside the stairs down to the driveway and waited for
the taxi. The night was clear and the stars were out. Catherine was very excited. “I’m
so glad it’s started,” she said. “Now in a little while it will be all over.”
“A Farewell to Arms” By Ernest Hemingway 133
“You’re a good brave girl.” “I’m not afraid. I wish the taxi would come, though.” We
heard it coming up the street and saw its headlights. It turned into the driveway and I
helped Catherine in and the driver put the bag up in front. “Drive to the hospital,” I
said. We went out of the driveway and started up the hill. At the hospital we went in
and I carried the bag. There was a woman at the desk who wrote down Catherine’s
name, age, address, relatives and religion, in a book. She said she had no religion
and the woman drew a line in the space after that word. She gave her name as
Catherine Henry. “I will take you up to your room,” she said. We went up in an
elevator. The woman stopped it and we stepped out and followed her down a hall.
Catherine held tight to my arm. “This is the room,” the woman said. “Will you please
undress and get into bed? Here is a night-gown for you to wear.” “I have a nightgown,” Catherine said. “It is better for you to wear this night-gown,” the woman said.
I went outside and sat on a chair in the hallway. “You can come in now,” the woman
said from the doorway. Catherine was lying in the narrow bed wearing a plain,
square-cut night-gown that looked as though it were made of rough sheeting. She
smiled at me. “I’m having fine pains now,” she said. The woman was holding her
wrist and timing the pains with a watch. “That was a big one,” Catherine said. I saw it
on her face. “Where’s the doctor?” I asked the woman. “He’s lying down sleeping.
He will be here when he is needed.” “I must do something for Madame, now,” the
nurse said. “Would you please step out again?” I went out into the hall. It was a bare
hall with two windows and closed doors all down the corridor. It smelled of hospital. I
sat on the chair and looked at the floor and prayed for Catherine. “You can come in,”
the nurse said. I went in. “Hello, darling,” Catherine said. “How is it?” “They are
coming quite often now.” Her face drew up. Then she smiled. “That was a real one.
Do you want to put your hand on my back again, nurse?” “If it helps you,” the nurse
said. “You go away, darling,” Catherine said. “Go out and get something to eat. I
may do this for a long time the nurse says.” “The first labor is usually protracted,” the
nurse said. “Please go out and get something to eat,” Catherine said. “I’m fine,
really.” “I’ll stay awhile,” I said. The pains came quite regularly, then slackened off.
Catherine was very excited. When the pains were bad she called them good ones.
When they started to fall off she was disappointed and ashamed. “You go out,
darling,” she said. “I think you are just making me self-conscious.” Her face tied up.
“There. That was better. I so want to be a good wife and have this child without any
foolishness. Please go and get some breakfast, darling, and then come back. I won’t
miss you. Nurse is splendid to me.” “You have plenty of time for breakfast,” the nurse
said. “I’ll go then. Good-by, sweet.” “Good-by,” Catherine said, “and have a fine
breakfast for me too.” “Where can I get breakfast?” I asked the nurse. “There’s a
café down the street at the square,” she said. “It should be open now.” Outside it
was getting light. I walked down the empty street to the café. There was a

“A Farewell to Arms” By Ernest Hemingway 134

light in the window. I went in and stood at the zinc bar and an old man served me a
glass of white wine and a brioche. The brioche was yesterday’s. I dipped it in the
wine and then drank a glass of coffee. “What do you do at this hour?” the old man
asked. “My wife is in labor at the hospital.” “So. I wish you good luck.” “Give me
another glass of wine.” He poured it from the bottle slopping it over a little so some
ran down on the zinc. I drank this glass, paid and went out. Outside along the street
were the refuse cans from the houses waiting for the collector. A dog was nosing at
one of the cans. “What do you want?” I asked and looked in the can to see if there
was anything I could pull out for him; there was nothing on top but coffee-grounds,
dust and some dead flowers. “There isn’t anything, dog,” I said. The dog crossed the
street. I went up the stairs in the hospital to the floor Catherine was on and down the
hall to her room. I knocked on the door. There was no answer. I opened the door;
the room was empty, except for Catherine’s bag on a chair and her dressing-gown
hanging on a hook on the wall. I went out and down the hall, looking for somebody. I
found a nurse. “Where is Madame Henry?” “A lady has just gone to the delivery
room.” “Where is it?” “I will show you.” She took me down to the end of the hall. The
door of the room was partly open. I could see Catherine lying on a table, covered by
a sheet. The nurse was on one side and the doctor stood on the other side of the
table beside some cylinders. The doctor held a rubber mask attached to a tube in
one hand. “I will give you a gown and you can go in,” the nurse said. “Come in here,
please.” She put a white gown on me and pinned it at the neck in back with a safety
pin. “Now you can go in,” she said. I went into the room. “Hello, darling,” Catherine
said in a strained voice. “I’m not doing much.” “You are Mr. Henry?” the doctor
asked. “Yes. How is everything going, doctor?” “Things are going very well,” the
doctor said. “We came in here where it is easy to give gas for the pains.” “I want it
now,” Catherine said. The doctor placed the rubber mask over her face and turned a
dial and I watched Catherine breathing deeply and rapidly. Then she pushed the
mask away. The doctor shut off the petcock. “That wasn’t a very big one. I had a
very big one a while ago. The doctor made me go clear out, didn’t you, doctor?” Her
voice was strange. It rose on the word doctor. The doctor smiled. “I want it again,”
Catherine said. She held the rubber tight to her face and breathed fast. I heard her
moaning a little. Then she pulled the mask away and smiled. “That was a big one,”
she said. “That was a very big one. Don’t you worry, darling. You go away. Go have
another breakfast.” “I’ll stay,” I said. We had gone to the hospital about three o’clock
in the morning. At noon Catherine was still in the delivery room. The pains had
slackened again. She looked very tired and worn now but she was still cheerful. “I’m
not any good, darling,” she said. “I’m so sorry. I thought I would do it very easily.
Now—there’s one—” she reached out her hand for the mask and held it over her
face. The doctor moved the dial and watched her. In a little while it was over. “It
wasn’t much,” Catherine said. She smiled. “I’m a fool about the gas. It’s wonderful.”
“We’ll get some for the home,” I said. “There one comes,” Catherine said quickly.
The doctor turned the dial and looked at his watch.

“A Farewell to Arms” By Ernest Hemingway 135

“What is the interval now?” I asked. “About a minute.” “Don’t you want lunch?” “I will
have something pretty soon,” he said. “You must have something to eat, doctor,”
Catherine said. “I’m so sorry I go on so long. Couldn’t my husband give me the gas?”
“If you wish,” the doctor said. “You turn it to the numeral two.” “I see,” I said. There
was a marker on a dial that turned with a handle. “I want it now,” Catherine said. She
held the mask tight to her face. I turned the dial to number two and when Catherine
put down the mask I turned it off. It was very good of the doctor to let me do
something. “Did you do it, darling?” Catherine asked. She stroked my wrist. “Sure.”
“You’re so lovely.” She was a little drunk from the gas. “I will eat from a tray in the
next room,” the doctor said. “You can call me any moment.” While the time passed I
watched him eat, then, after a while, I saw that he was lying down and smoking a
cigarette. Catherine was getting very tired. “Do you think I’ll ever have this baby?”
she asked. “Yes, of course you will.” “I try as hard as I can. I push down but it goes
away. There it comes. Give it to me.” At two o’clock I went out and had lunch. There
were a few men in the café sitting with coffee and glasses of kirsch or marc on the
tables. I sat down at a table. “Can I eat?” I asked the waiter. “It is past time for
lunch.” “Isn’t there anything for all hours?” “You can have choucroute.” “Give me
choucroute and beer.” “A demi or a bock?” “A light demi.” The waiter brought a dish
of sauerkraut with a slice of ham over the top and a sausage buried in the hot winesoaked cabbage. I ate it and drank the beer. I was very hungry. I watched the people
at the tables in the café. At one table they were playing cards. Two men at the table
next me were talking and smoking. The café was full of smoke. The zinc bar, where I
had breakfasted, had three people behind it now; the old man, a plump woman in a
black dress who sat behind a counter and kept track of everything served to the
tables, and a boy in an apron. I wondered how many children the woman had and
what it had been like. When I was through with the choucroute I went back to the
hospital. The street was all clean now. There were no refuse cans out. The day was
cloudy but the sun was trying to come through. I rode upstairs in the elevator,
stepped out and went down the hail to Catherine’s room, where I had left my white
gown. I put it on and pinned it in back at the neck. I looked in the glass and saw
myself looking like a fake doctor with a beard. I went down the hail to the delivery
room. The door was closed and I knocked. No one answered so I turned the handle
and went in. The doctor sat by Catherine. The nurse was doing something at the
other end of the room. “Here is your husband,” the doctor said. “Oh, darling, I have
the most wonderful doctor,” Catherine said in a very strange voice. “He’s been telling
me the most wonderful story and when the pain came too badly he put me all the
way out. He’s wonderful. You’re wonderful, doctor.” “You’re drunk,” I said. “I know it,”
Catherine said. “But you shouldn’t say it.” Then “Give it to me. Give it to me.” She
clutched hold of the mask and breathed short and deep, pantingly, making the
respirator click. Then she gave a long sigh and the doctor reached with his left hand
and lifted away the mask.

“A Farewell to Arms” By Ernest Hemingway 136

“That was a very big one,” Catherine said. Her voice was very strange. “I’m not going
to die now, darling. I’m past where I was going to die. Aren’t you glad?” “Don’t you
get in that place again.” “I won’t. I’m not afraid of it though. I won’t die, darling.” “You
will not do any such foolishness,” the doctor said. “You would not die and leave your
husband.” “Oh, no. I won’t die. I wouldn’t die. It’s silly to die. There it comes. Give it
to me.” After a while the doctor said, “You will go out, Mr. Henry, for a few moments
and I will make an examination.” “He wants to see how I am doing,” Catherine said.
“You can come back afterward, darling, can’t he, doctor?” “Yes,” said the doctor. “I
will send word when he can come back.” I went out the door and down the hall to the
room where Catherine was to be after the baby came. I sat in a chair there and
looked at the room. I had the paper in my coat that I had bought when I went out for
lunch and I read it. It was beginning to be dark outside and I turned the light on to
read. After a while I stopped reading and turned off the light and watched it get dark
outside. I wondered why the doctor did not send for me. Maybe it was better I was
away. He probably wanted me away for a while. I looked at my watch. If he did not
send for me in ten minutes I would go down anyway. Poor, poor dear Cat. And this
was the price you paid for sleeping together. This was the end of the trap. This was
what people got for loving each other. Thank God for gas, anyway. What must it
have been like before there were anaesthetics? Once it started, they were in the millrace. Catherine had a good time in the time of pregnancy. It wasn’t bad. She was
hardly ever sick. She was not awfully uncomfortable until toward the last. So now
they got her in the end. You never got away with anything. Get away hell! It would
have been the same if we had been married fifty times. And what if she should die?
She won’t die. People don’t die in childbirth nowadays. That was what all husbands
thought. Yes, but what if she should die? She won’t die. She’s just having a bad
time. The initial labor is usually protracted. She’s only having a bad time. Afterward
we’d say what a bad time and Catherine would say it wasn’t really so bad. But what
if she should die? She can’t die. Yes, but what if she should die? She can’t, I tell you.
Don’t be a fool. It’s just a bad time. It’s just nature giving her hell. It’s only the first
labor, which is almost always protracted. Yes, but what if she should die? She can’t
die. Why would she die? What reason is there for her to die? There’s just a child that
has to be born, the by-product of good nights in Milan. It makes trouble and is born
and then you look after it and get fond of it maybe. But what if she should die? She
won’t die. But what if she should die? She won’t. She’s all right. But what if she
should die? She can’t die. But what if she should die? Hey, what about that? What if
she should die? The doctor came into the room. “How does it go, doctor?” “It doesn’t
go,” he said. “What do you mean?” “Just that. I made an examination—” He detailed
the result of the examination. “Since then I’ve waited to see. But it doesn’t go.” “What
do you advise?” “There are two things. Either a high forceps delivery which can tear
and be quite dangerous besides being possibly bad for the child, and a Caesarean.”
“What is the danger of a Caesarean?” What if she should die! “It should be no
greater than the danger of an ordinary delivery.” “Would you do it yourself?” “Yes. I
would need possibly an hour to get things ready and to get the people I would need.
Perhaps a little less.” “What do you think?” “I would advise a Caesarean operation. If
it were my wife I would do a Caesarean.” “What are the after effects?”

“A Farewell to Arms” By Ernest Hemingway 137

“There are none. There is only the scar.” “What about infection?” “The danger is not
so great as in a high forceps delivery.” “What if you just went on and did nothing?”
“You would have to do something eventually. Mrs. Henry is already losing much of
her strength. The sooner we operate now the safer.” “Operate as soon as you can,” I
said. “I will go and give the instructions.” I went into the delivery room. The nurse
was with Catherine who lay on the table, big under the sheet, looking very pale and
tired. “Did you tell him he could do it?” she asked. “Yes.” “Isn’t that grand. Now it will
be all over in an hour. I’m almost done, darling. I’m going all to pieces. Please give
me that. It doesn’t work. Oh, it doesn’t work!” “Breathe deeply.” “I am. Oh, it doesn’t
work any more. It doesn’t work!” “Get another cylinder,” I said to the nurse. “That is a
new cylinder.” “I’m just a fool, darling,” Catherine said. “But it doesn’t work any
more.” She began to cry. “Oh, I wanted so to have this baby and not make trouble,
and now I’m all done and all gone to pieces and it doesn’t work. Oh, darling, it
doesn’t work at all. I don’t care if I die if it will only stop. Oh, please, darling, please
make it stop. There it comes. Oh Oh Oh!” She breathed sobbingly in the mask. “It
doesn’t work. It doesn’t work. It doesn’t work. Don’t mind me, darling. Please don’t
cry. Don’t mind me. I’m just gone all to pieces. You poor sweet. I love you so and I’ll
be good again. I’ll be good this time. Can’t they give me something? If they could
only give me something.” “I’ll make it work. I’ll turn it all the way.” “Give it to me now.”
I turned the dial all the way and as she breathed hard and deep her hand relaxed on
the mask. I shut off the gas and lifted the mask. She came back from a long way
away. “That was lovely, darling. Oh, you’re so good to me.” “You be brave, because I
can’t do that all the time. It might kill you.” “I’m not brave any more, darling. I’m all
broken. They’ve broken me. I know it now.” “Everybody is that way.” “But it’s awful.
They just keep it up till they break you.” “In an hour it will be over.” “Isn’t that lovely?
Darling, I won’t die, will I?” “No. I promise you won’t.” “Because I don’t want to die
and leave you, but I get so tired of it and I feel I’m going to die.” “Nonsense.
Everybody feels that.” “Sometimes I know I’m going to die.” “You won’t. You can’t.”
“But what if I should?” “I won’t let you.” “Give it to me quick. Give it to me!” Then
afterward, “I won’t die. I won’t let myself die.” “Of course you won’t.” “You’ll stay with
me?” “Not to watch it.” “No, just to be there.” “Sure. I’ll be there all the time.” “You’re
so good to me. There, give it to me. Give me some more. It’s not working!” I turned
the dial to three and then four. I wished the doctor would come back. I was

“A Farewell to Arms” By Ernest Hemingway 138

afraid of the numbers above two. Finally a new doctor came in with two nurses and
they lifted Catherine onto a wheeled stretcher and we started down the hall. The
stretcher went rapidly dOwn the hall and into the elevator where every one had to
crowd against the wall to make room; then up, then an open door and out of the
elevator and down the hall on rubber wheels to the operating room. I did not
recognize the doctor with his cap and mask on. There was another doctor and more
nurses. “They’ve got to give me something,” Catherine said. “They’ve got to give me
something. Oh please, doctor, give me enough to do some good!” One of the
doctors put a mask over her face and I looked through the door and saw the bright
small amphitheatre of the operating room. “You can go in the other door and sit up
there,” a nurse said to me. There were benches behind a rail that looked down on
the white table and the lights. I looked at Catherine. The mask was over her face and
she was quiet now. They wheeled the stretcher forward. I turned away and walked
down the hall. Two nurses were hurrying toward the entrance to the gallery. “It’s a
Caesarean,” one said. “They’re going to do a Caesarean.” The other one laughed,
“We’re just in time. Aren’t we lucky?” They went in the door that led to the gallery.
Another nurse came along. She was hurrying too. “You go right in there. Go right in,”
she said. “I’m staying outside.” She hurried in. I walked up and down the hall. I was
afraid to go in. I looked out the window. It was dark but in the light from the window I
could see it was raining. I went into a room at the far end of the hall and looked at
the labels on bottles in a glass case. Then I came out and stood in the empty hall
and watched the door of the operating room. A doctor came out followed by a nurse.
He held something in his two hands that looked like a freshly skinned rabbit and
hurried across the corridor with it and in through another door. I went down to the
door he had gone into and found them in the room doing things to a new-born child.
The doctor held him up for me to see. He held him by the heels and slapped him. “Is
he all right?” “He’s magnificent. He’ll weigh five kilos.” I had no feeling for him. He did
not seem to have anything to do with me. I felt no feeling of fatherhood. “Aren’t you
proud of your son?” the nurse asked. They were washing him and wrapping him in
something. I saw the little dark face and dark hand, but I did not see him move or
hear him cry. The doctor was doing something to him again. He looked upset. “No,” I
said. “He nearly killed his mother.” “It isn’t the little darling’s fault. Didn’t you want a
boy?” “No,” I said. The doctor was busy with him. He held him up by the feet and
slapped him. I did not wait to see it. I went out in the hail. I could go in now and see. I
went in the door and a little way down the gallery. The nurses who were sitting at the
rail motioned for me to come down where they were. I shook my head. I could see
enough where I was. I thought Catherine was dead. She looked dead. Her face was
gray, the part of it that I could see. Down below, under the light, the doctor was
sewing up the great long, forcep-spread, thickedged, wound. Another doctor in a
mask gave the anaesthetic. Two nurses in masks handed things. It looked like a
drawing of the Inquisition. I knew as I watched I could have watched it all, but I was
glad I hadn’t. I do not think I could have watched them cut, but I watched the wound
closed into a high welted ridge with quick skilful-looking stitches like a cobbler’s, and
was glad. When the wound was closed I went out into the hall and walked up and
down again. After a while the doctor came out.

“A Farewell to Arms” By Ernest Hemingway 139

“How is she?” “She is all right. Did you watch?” He looked tired. “I saw you sew up.
The incision looked very long.” “You thought so?” “Yes. Will that scar flatten out?”
“Oh, yes.” After a while they brought out the wheeled stretcher and took it very
rapidly down the hallway to the elevator. I went along beside it. Catherine was
moaning. Downstairs they put her in the bed in her room. I sat in a chair at the foot of
the bed. There was a nurse in the room. I got up and stood by the bed. It was dark in
the room. Catherine put out her hand. “Hello, darling,” she said. Her voice was very
weak and tired. “Hello, you sweet.” “What sort of baby was it?” “Sh—don’t talk,” the
nurse said. “A boy. He’s long and wide and dark.” “Is he all right?” “Yes,” I said. “He’s
fine.” I saw the nurse look at me strangely. “I’m awfully tired,” Catherine said. “And I
hurt like hell. Are you all right, darling?” “I’m fine. Don’t talk.” “You were lovely to me.
Oh, darling, I hurt dreadfully. What does he look like?” “He looks like a skinned rabbit
with a puckered-up old-man’s face.” “You must go out,” the nurse said. “Madame
Henry must not talk.” “I’ll be outside.” “Go and get something to eat.” “No. I’ll be
outside.” I kissed Catherine. She was very gray and weak and tired. “May I speak to
you?” I said to the nurse. She came out in the hall with me. I walked a little way
down the hall. “What’s the matter with the baby?” I asked. “Didn’t you know?” “No.”
“He wasn’t alive.” “He was dead?” “They couldn’t start him breathing. The cord was
caught around his neck or something.” “So he’s dead.” “Yes. It’s such a shame. He
was such a fine big boy. I thought you knew.” “No,” I said. “You better go back in with
Madame.” I sat down on the chair in front of a table where there were nurses’ reports
hung on clips at the side and looked out of the window. I could see nothing but the
dark and the rain falling across the light from the window. So that was it. The baby
was dead. That was why the doctor looked so tired. But why had they acted the way
they did in the room with him? They supposed he would come around and start
breathing probably. I had no religion but I knew he ought to have been baptized. But
what if he never breathed at all. He hadn’t. He had never been alive. Except in
Catherine. I’d felt him kick there often enough. But I hadn’t for a week. Maybe he
was choked all the time. Poor little kid. I wished the hell I’d been choked like that. No
I didn’t. Still there would not be all this dying to go through. Now Catherine would die.
That was what you did. You died. You did not know what it was about. You never
had time to learn. They threw you in and told you the rules and the first time they
caught you off base they killed you. Or they killed you gratuitously like Aymo. Or
gave you the syphilis like Rinaldi. But they killed you in the end. You could count on
that. Stay around and they would kill you. Once in camp I put a log on top of the fire
and it was full of ants. As it commenced to burn, the ants swarmed out and went first
toward the centre where the fire was; then

“A Farewell to Arms” By Ernest Hemingway 140

turned back and ran toward the end. When there were enough on the end they fell
off into the fire. Some got out, their bodies burnt and flattened, and went off not
knowing where they were going. But most of them went toward the fire and then
back toward the end and swarmed on the cool end and finally fell off into the fire. I
remember thinking at the time that it was the end of the world and a splendid chance
to be a messiah and lift the log off the fire and throw it out where the ants could get
off onto the ground. But I did not do anything but throw a tin cup of water on the log,
so that I would have the cup empty to put whiskey in before I added water to it. I
think the cup of water on the burning log only steamed the ants. So now I sat out in
the hall and waited to hear how Catherine was. The nurse did not come out, so after
a while I went to the door and opened it very softly and looked in. I could not see at
first because there was a bright light in the hall and it was dark in the room. Then I
saw the nurse sitting by the bed and Catherine’s head on a pillow, and she was all
flat under the sheet. The nurse put her finger to her lips, then stood up and came to
the door. “How is she?” I asked. “She’s all right,” the nurse said. “You should go and
have your supper and then come back if you wish.” I went down the hall and then
down the stairs and out the door of the hospital and down the dark street in the rain
to the café. It was brightly lighted inside and there were many people at the tables. I
did not see a place to sit, and a waiter came up to me and took my wet coat and hat
and showed me a place at a table across from an elderly man who was drinking beer
and reading the evening paper. I sat down and asked the waiter what the plat du jour
was. “Veal stew—but it is finished.” “What can I have to eat?” “Ham and eggs, eggs
with cheese, or choucroute.” “I had choucroute this noon,” I said. “That’s true,” he
said. “That’s true. You ate choucroute this noon.” He was a middle-aged man with a
bald top to his head and his hair slicked over it. He had a kind face. “What do you
want? Ham and eggs or eggs with cheese?” “Ham and eggs,” I said, “and beer.” “A
demi-blonde?” “Yes,” I said. “I remembered,” he said. “You took a demi-blonde this
noon.” I ate the ham and eggs and drank the beer. The ham and eggs were in a
round dish—the ham underneath and the eggs on top. It was very hot and at the first
mouthful I had to take a drink of beer to cool my mouth. I was hungry and I asked the
waiter for another order. I drank several glasses of beer. I was not thinking at all but
read the paper of the man opposite me. It was about the break through on the British
front. When he realized I was reading the back of his paper he folded it over. I
thought of asking the waiter for a paper, but I could not concentrate. It was hot in the
café and the air was bad. Many of the people at the tables knew one another. There
were several card games going on. The waiters were busy bringing drinks from the
bar to the tables. Two men came in and could find no place to sit. They stood
opposite the table where I was. I ordered another beer. I was not ready to leave yet.
It was too soon to go back to the hospital. I tried not to think and to be perfectly calm.
The men stood around but no one was leaving, so they went out. I drank another
beer. There was quite a pile of saucers now on the table in front of me. The man
opposite me had taken off his spectacles, put them away in a case, folded his paper
and put it in his pocket and now sat holding his liqueur glass and looking out at the
room. Suddenly I knew I had to get back. I called the waiter, paid the reckoning, got
into my coat, put on my hat and started out the door. I walked through the rain up to
the hospital. Upstairs I met the nurse coming down the hall. “I just called you at the
hotel,” she said. Something dropped inside me.

“A Farewell to Arms” By Ernest Hemingway 141

“What is wrong?” “Mrs. Henry has had a hemorrhage.” “Can I go in?” “No, not yet.
The doctor is with her.” “Is it dangerous?” “It is very dangerous.” The nurse went into
the room and shut the door. I sat outside in the hail. Everything was gone inside of
me. I did not think. I could not think. I knew she was going to die and I prayed that
she would not. Don’t let her die. Oh, God, please don’t let her die. I’ll do anything for
you if you won’t let her die. Please, please, please, dear God, don’t let her die. Dear
God, don’t let her die. Please, please, please don’t let her die. God please make her
not die. I’ll do anything you say if you don’t let her die. You took the baby but don’t let
her die. That was all right but don’t let her die. Please, please, dear God, don’t let
her die. The nurse opened the door and motioned with her finger for me to come. I
followed her into the room. Catherine did not look up when I came in. I went over to
the side of the bed. The doctor was standing by the bed on the opposite side.
Catherine looked at me and smiled. I bent down over the bed and started to cry.
“Poor darling,” Catherine said very softly. She looked gray. “You’re all right, Cat,” I
said. “You’re going to be all right.” “I’m going to die,” she said; then waited and said,
“I hate it.” I took her hand. “Don’t touch me,” she said. I let go of her hand. She
smiled. “Poor darling. You touch me all you want.” “You’ll be all right, Cat. I know
you’ll be all right.” “I meant to write you a letter to have if anything happened, but I
didn’t do it.” “Do you want me to get a priest or any one to come and see you?” “Just
you,” she said. Then a little later, “I’m not afraid. I just hate it.” “You must not talk so
much,” the doctor said. “All right,” Catherine said. “Do you want me to do anything,
Cat? Can I get you anything?” Catherine smiled, “No.” Then a little later, “You won’t
do our things with another girl, or say the same things, will you?” “Never.” “I want you
to have girls, though.” “I don’t want them.” “You are talking too much,” the doctor
said. “Mr. Henry must go out. He can come back again later. You are not going to
die. You must not be silly.” “All right,” Catherine said. “I’ll come and stay with you
nights,” she said. It was very hard for her to talk. “Please go out of the room,” the
doctor said. “You cannot talk.” Catherine winked at me, her face gray. “I’ll be right
outside,” I said. “Don’t worry, darling,” Catherine said. “I’m not a bit afraid. It’s just a
dirty trick.” “You dear, brave sweet.” I waited outside in the hall. I waited a long time.
The nurse came to the door and came over to me. “I’m afraid Mrs. Henry is very ill,”
she said. “I’m afraid for her.” “Is she dead?” “No, but she is unconscious.” It seems
she had one hemorrhage after another. They couldn’t stop it. I went into the room
and stayed with Catherine until she died. She was unconscious all the time, and it
did not take her very long to die. Outside the room, in the hall, I spoke to the doctor,
“Is there anything I can do to-night?” “No. There is nothing to do. Can I take you to
your hotel?” “No, thank you. I am going to stay here a while.” “I know there is nothing
to say. I cannot tell you—”

“A Farewell to Arms” By Ernest Hemingway 142

“No,” I said. “There’s nothing to say.” “Good-night,” he said. “I cannot take you to
your hotel?” “No, thank you.” “It was the only thing to do,” he said. “The operation
proved—” “I do not want to talk about it,” I said. “I would like to take you to your
hotel.” “No, thank you.” He went down the hall. I went to the door of the room. “You
can’t come in now,” one of the nurses said. “Yes I can,” I said. “You can’t come in
yet.” “You get out,” I said. “The other one too.” But after I had got them out and shut
the door and turned off the light it wasn’t any good. It was like saying good-by to a
statue. After a while I went out and left the hospital and walked back to the hotel in
the rain.